
8o A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

in what might be termed a flash of divine enlightenment, 
though very few have documentary evidence to prove their 
instantaneous return to Hfe. 

My memory during this phase might be Hkened to a photo- 
graphic film, seven hundred and ninety-eight days long. 
Each impression seems to have been made in a negative way 
and then, in a fraction of a second, miraculously developed 
and made positive. Of hundreds of impressions made dur- 
ing that depressed period I had not before been conscious, 
but from the moment I regained my reason they have stood 
out vividly. Not only so, but all impressions gathered during 
earher years have done Hkewise. Since that August 30th, 
which I regard as my second birthday (my first was on the 
30th of another month) my mind has exhibited quahties 
which, prior to that time, were so latent as to be scarcely 
distinguishable. As a result, I find myself able to do 
desirable things I never before dreamed of doing — the 
writing of this book is one of them. 

Yet had I failed to convince myself on August 30th, when 
my brother came to see me, that he was no spy, I am almost 
sure that I should have compassed my own destruction within 
the following ten days, for the next month, I believed, was the 
fatal one of opening courts. It was death by drowning that 
impended. And I find it peculiarly appropriate to Hken my 
salvation itself to a prolonged process of drowning. Thou- 
sands of minutes of the seven hundred and ninety-eight days 
— and there were over one milHon of them, during which I 
had been borne down by intolerably burdensome delusions — 
were, I imagine, much Hke the last minutes of consciousness 
experienced by persons who drown. Many who have 
narrowly escaped this fate can testify to the vividness 
with which good and bad impressions of their entire life 
rush through their confused minds, and hold them in a grip 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 8l 

of terror until a kind unconsciousness envelopes them. Such 
had been many of my moments. But the only unconscious- 
ness which had deadened my sensibilities during these two 
despondent years was the semi-unconsciousness of sleep it- 
self. Though I slept well most of the time, mine was seldom 
a dreamless sleep. Many of my dreams were, if anything, 
harder to bear than my delusions of the day, for what little 
reason I had was absolutely suspended in sleep. Almost 
every night my brain was at battledore and shuttlecock with 
weird thoughts. And if not all my dreams were terrifying, 
this fact seemed to be only because a perverted and perverse 
Reason, in order that its possessor might not lose the capac- 
ity for suffering, knew how to keep Hope alive with visions 
which suppHed the contrast necessary for keen appreciation. 
^ No man can be bom again, but I believe I came as near 
' it as ever a man did. To leave behind what was in reality a 
Hell, and, in less than one second, have this good green earth 
revealed in more glory than most men ever see it in, was a 
compensating privilege which makes me feel that my suffer- 
ing was distinctly worth while. This statement will no 
doubt seem extravagant to those who dread insanity; but 
those who appreciate what a privilege it is to be placed in a 
position to do great good, will, I am sure, credit me with 
sincerity. For have I not before me a field of philanthropy 
in which to work — a field which, even in this altruistic 
age, is practically untouched ? 

I have already described the peculiar sensation which 
assailed me when, in June, 1900, I lost my reason. At that 
time my brain felt as though pricked by a milHon needles at 
white heat. On this August 30th, 1902, shortly after regain- 
ing my reason, I had another most distinct sensation in the 
brain. It started under my brow and gradually spread until 
the entire surface was affected. The throes of a dying Rea- 
7 



82 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

son had been torture. The sensations felt as my dead Reason 
was reborn were delightful. It seemed as though the re- 
freshing breath of some kind Goddess of Wisdom were being 
gently blown against the surface of my brain. It was a 
sensation not unlike that produced by a menthol pencil 
rubbed ever so gently over a fevered brow. So delicate, so 
crisp and exhilarating was it that words fail me in my at- 
tempt to describe it. Doctors have it, in theory at least, 
that my depressed condition had been caused by a defective 
circulation of blood in the brain. The elated phase of my 
illness, which immediately followed, was, on the other hand, 
due to an over-stimulation of the brain-cells, caused by an 
intoxicating supply of blood vouchsafed by an abnormally 
joyous heart. Few, if any experiences, can be more dehghtful 
than that which followed. If the exaltation produced by 
some drugs is anything Hke it, I can easily understand how 
and why certain pernicious habits enslave those who contract 
them. For me, however, this experience was liberation, 
not enslavement. 



XII 

After two years of silence I found it no easy matter to 
carry on with my brother a sustained conversation. So weak 
were my vocal cords from lack of use that every few minutes 
I must either rest or whisper. And, upon trying, I found 
myself unable to whistle, notwithstanding the popular belief, 
drawn from vague memories of small-boyhood, that this art 
is instinctive. Those who all their lives have talked at 
will cannot possibly appreciate the enjoyment I found in 
using my regained power of speech. Reluctantly I returned 
to the ward; but not until my brother had left for home, 
laden with so much of my conversation that it took most of 
his leisure for the next two days to tell the family what I 
had said in two hours. 

During the first few hours I seemed virtually normal. 
I had none of the delusions which had previously oppressed 
me; nor had I yet developed any of the expansive ideas, or 
delusions of grandeur, which soon began to crowd in upon 
me. So normal did I appear while talking to my brother 
that he thought I should be able to return home in a few 
weeks; and, needless to say, I agreed with him. But the 
pendulum, as it were, had swung too far. The human 
brain is too complex a mechanism to admit of any such 
complete re-adjustment in an instant. It is said to be com- 
posed of several billion cells; and, that fact granted, it seems 
safe to say that every day, perhaps every hour, hundreds of 
thousands of those within my skull were now being brought 

83 



84 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

into a state of renewed activity. Comparatively sane and able 
to recognize the important truths of life, I was yet insane as 
to many of its practical details. Judgment being King of 
the Realm of Thought, it was not surprising that my judg- 
ment faUed often to decide correctly the many questions 
presented to it by its abnormally communicative subjects. 
At first I seemed to live a second childhood. I did with 
delight many things which I had first learned to do as a 
child — the more so as it had been necessary for me to 
learn again how to eat and walk, and now how to talk. I 
had much lost time to make up; and, for a while, my sole 
ambition seemed to be to utter as many thousand words per 
diem as possible. My fellow-patients who for fourteen 
months had seen me walk about in silence — a silence so 
profound and inexorable that I would seldom heed their 
friendly salutations — were naturally surprised to see me 
in my new mood of unrestrained loquacity and irrepres- 
sible good-humor. In short, I had come into that abnor- 
mal condition which is known to psychiatrists as " elation." 
For several weeks I believe I did not sleep more than two 
or three hours of the twenty-four, each day. Such was my 
state of elation, however, that all signs of fatigue were en- 
tirely absent; and the sustained and abnormal mental and 
physical activity, in which I then indulged, has left on my 
memory no other than a series of very pleasant impressions. 
Though based on fancy the delights of madness are real. 
Few, if any, sane persons would care to test the matter at so 
great a price; but those familiar with the "Letters of Charles 
Lamb," must know that Lamb himself, at one time during 
his early manhood, underwent treatment for mental dis- 
ease. In a letter to Coleridge, dated June lo, 1796, he says: 
"At some future time I will amuse you with an account, 
as full as my memory will permit, of the strange turns my 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 85 

frenzy took. I look back upon it at times with a gloomy kind 
of envy; for, while it lasted, I had many, many hours of pure 
happiness. Dream not, Coleridge, of having tasted all the 
grandeur and wildness of Fancy till you have gone mad! 
All now seems to me vapid, comparatively so!" 

As for me, the very first night vague and vast humanita- 
rian projects began joyously to shape themselves in my mind. 
My garden of thoughts seemed filled with flowers which 
might properly be likened to the quick-blowing, night-bloom- 
ing cereus — that Delusion of Grandeur of all flowering plants 
that thinks itself prodigal enough if it but unmask its beauty 
to the moon! Few of my bold fancies, however, were of so 
fugitive and chaste a splendor. 

The religious instinct is found in primitive man. It is 
not strange, therefore, that at this time the religious side 
of my nature was the first to display compeUing activity. 
Whether or not this was due to my rescue from a living death, 
and my immediate appreciation of God's goodness both to 
me and to those faithful relatives who had done all the pray- 
ing during the preceding two years — this I cannot say. 
But the fact stands out, that, whereas I had, while in the 
depressed state, attached a sinister significance to every- 
thing done or said in my presence, I now interpreted the 
most trifling incidents as messages from God. The day 
after this transition I attended church. It was the 
first service in over two years which I had not attended 
against my will. The reading of a psalm — the 45 th — 
made a lasting impression upon me, and the interpretation 
which I placed upon it furnishes the key to my attitude 
during the first weeks of elation. It seemed to me a direct 
message from Heaven. 

The minister began: "My heart is inditing a good matter: 
I speak of the things which I have made touching the King : 



86 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

my tongue is the pen of a ready writer." — Whose heart but 
mine? And the things indited — what were they but the 
humanitarian projects which had blossomed in my garden 
of thoughts over night? When, a few days later, I found 
myself writing very long letters with unwonted facility, I 
became convinced that my tongue was to prove itself "the 
pen of a ready writer." Indeed, to these prophetic words 
I trace the inception of an irresistible desire, of which this 
book is the first fruit. / 

"Thou art fairer than the children of men: grace is poured 
into thy lips:" was the verse next read, to which the minister 
responded, "Therefore God hath blessed thee for ever." — 
"Surely," thought I, "I. have been selected as the instru- 
ment wherewith great reforms shall be effected." (All is 
grist that comes to the mill of a mind in elation, — then even 
divine encomiums seem not undeserved.) 

"Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, O most mighty, with 
thy glory and thy majesty," — a command to fight. "And 
in thy majesty ride prosperously because of truth and meek- 
ness and righteousness;" repHed the minister. "And thy 
right hand shall teach thee terrible things," read I. That 
I could speak the truth, I knew. "Meekness" I could not 
associate with myself, except that during the preceding 
two years I had suffered many indignities without open re- 
sentment. That my right hand with a pen should teach me 
terrible things — how to fight for reform — I firmly believed. 

" Thine arrows are sharp in the heart of the King's enemies, 
whereby the people fall under thee," quoth the minister. 
Yes, my tongue could be as sharp as an arrow, and I should 
be able to stand up against those who should stand in 
the way of reform. Again: "Thou lovest righteousness, 
and hatest wickedness. — Therefore God, thy God, hath 
anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows." 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 87 

The first sentence I did not apply to myself; but being then, 
as I supposed, a man restored to himself, it was easy to feel 
that I had been anointed with the oil of gladness above my 
fellows. "Oil of gladness" is, in truth, an apt phrase 
wherewith to describe "elation." 

The last two verses of the psalm corroborated the mes- 
sages found in the preceding verses: "I will make thy name 
to be remembered in all generations:" — thus the minister. 
"Therefore shall the people praise thee for ever and ever," 
was the response I read. That spelled immortal fame 
for me, but only on condition that I should carry to a success- 
ful conclusion the mission of reform — an obligation placed 
upon me by God when He restored my reason. 

I know of no better v/ay to convey to the reader my 
state of mind during these first weeks of elation than to 
confess — if confession it is — that when I set out upon a 
career of reform I was impelled to do so by motives in 
part like those which seem to have possessed Don Quixote 
when he, madman that he was, set forth, as Cervantes 
says, with the intention "of righting every kind of wrong, 
and exposing himself to peril and danger, from which in 
the issue he would obtain eternal renown and fame." The 
quoted passage, first read by me while preparing for publi- 
cation the printed proof of my manuscript, embodies the 
very idea I had expressed months earher, while writing the 
paragraph which immediately precedes this one. In liken- 
ing myself to Cerv^antes' mad hero my purpose is quite 
other than to push myself within the charmed circle of the 
chivalrous. What I wish to do is to make plain that one 
abnormally elated may be swayed irresistibly by his best 
instincts, and that while under the spell of an exaltation, 
idealistic in degree, he may not only be willing, but eager 
to assume risks and endure hardships which under normal 



88 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

conditions he would assume reluctantly, if at all. In jus- 
tice to myself, however, and lest I should do "the cause" 
an injury, I feel privileged to remark that my plans for 
reform have never assumed Quixotic, and therefore im- 
practicable, proportions. At no time have I gone a-tilting 
at windmills. A pen rather than a lance has been my 
weapon of offense and defense; for with its point I have 
felt sure that I should one day prick the civic conscience 
into a compassionate activity, and thus bring into a neg- 
lected field earnest men and women who should act as 
champions for those afflicted thousands least able to fight 
for themselves. 



XIII 

After being without relatives and friends for over two 
years I naturally lost no time in trying again to get in touch 
with them; — though I did heed my conservator's request 
that I first give him two or three days in which to acquaint 
certain persons with the new turn my affairs had taken. 

During the latter part of that first week I wrote many 
letters, so many, indeed, that I soon exhausted a liberal 
supply of stationery. This had been placed at my 
disposal at the suggestion of my conservator, who had 
wisely arranged that I should have whatever I wanted, if 
expedient. It was now at my own suggestion that the super- 
visor gave me large sheets of manila wrapping paper. These 
I proceeded to cut into strips a foot wide. One such strip, 
four feet long, would suffice for a mere billet-doux; but a 
real letter usually required several such strips pasted to- 
gether. More than once letters twenty or thirty feet long were 
written; and on one occasion the accumulation of two or 
three days of excessive productivity, when spread upon the 
floor, reached from one end of the corridor to the other — a 
distance of about one hundred feet. My output per hour 
was something Hke twelve feet with an average of one hun- 
dred and fifty words to the foot. Under the pressure of 
elation one takes pride in doing everything in record time. 
Despite my speed, however, my letters were not incoherent. 
They were simply digressive, which was to be expected, as 
elation befogs one's "goal idea." Though these epistolary 
monstrosities were launched, few reached their intended 

89 




90 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

addressees, for my conservator had wisely ordered that my 
literary output be sent in bulk to him. This interference 
was exasperating, but later I reahzed that my brother had 
done me a great favor when he interposed his judgment 
between my red-hot mentahty and the cool minds of the 
work-a-day world. Yet, this interference with what I 
deemed my rights proved to be the first step in the general 
overruling of them by tactless attendants and, in particular, 
by a certain assistant physician. 

All my life I have exhibited more than the average desire 
to superintend; and when a man is so constituted that he 
knows — or thinks he knows — what he wants to do at any 
present or future time, it is quite natural that he should give 
more advice than he is willing to take. In my elated con- 
dition I had an excess of questionable executive ability; and 
in order to decrease this executive pressure I proceeded to 
assume entire charge of that portion of the hospital in which 
I happened at the moment to be confined. What I even- 
tually issued as imperative orders, at first were often pre- 
sented as suggestions. But my statements were usually 
requests — my requests, demands; and, if my suggestions 
were not accorded a respectful hearing, and my demands 
acted on at once, I invariably substituted vituperative ulti- 
matums. These were double-edged, and involved me in 
trouble quite as often as they gained the ends I had in view. 

The assistant physician in charge of my case, realizing 
that he could not grant all of my requests, unwisely decided 
to deny most of them. Had he been tactful he could have 
taken the same stand without arousing my animosity. As 
it was, he treated me with a contemptuous sort of indiffer- 
ence which finally developed into spite, and led to much 
trouble for us both. During the two wild months that 
followed, the superintendent and the steward could induce 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 91 

me to do almost anything by simply requesting it. If two 
men out of three could control me easily during such a period 
of mental excitement, is it not reasonable to suppose that 
the third man, the assistant physician, could likewise have 
controlled me had he treated me with due consideration? 
It was his undisguised superciliousness that gave birth to 
my contempt for him. In a letter written during my second 
week of elation, I expressed the opinion that he and I should 
get along well together. But that was before I had become 
troublesome enough to try the man's patience. Neverthe- 
less, it indicates that this doctor could have saved himself 
hours of time and subsequent worry had he met my friendly 
advances in the proper spirit. Physicians throughout the 
country engaged in work among the insane may profitably 
take this observation to heart, — and ''heart" I use advisedly, 
for it is the quality of heart rather than the quantity of mind 
that cures or makes happy the insane. 



The literary impulse took such a hold on me that when I 
first sat down to compose a letter I bluntly refused to stop 
writing and go to bed when the attendant ordered me to do 
so. For over one year this man had seen me mute and meek, 
and the sudden and startling change from passive obedience 
to uncompromising independence naturally puzzled him. 
He threatened to drag me to my room, but strangely enough 
decided not to do so. After half an hour's futile coaxing, 
during which time an unwonted supply of blood was drawn 
to his brain, that surprised organ proved its gratitude by giv- 
ing birth to a timely and sensible idea. With an unaccus- 
tomed resourcefulness, by cutting off the supply of light at 
the switch, he put the entire ward in darkness. Secretly I 
admired the stratagem, but my words on that occasion 



92 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

probably conveyed no idea of the approbation that lurked 
within me. 

I then went to bed, but not to sleep. The ecstasy of ela- 
tion made each conscious hour one of rapturous happiness, 
and my memory knows no day of brighter simlight than 
those nights. The flood gates of thought were wide open. 
So jealous of each other were the thoughts that they seemed 
to stumble over one another in their mad rush to present 
themselves to my re-enthroned ego. 

I naturally craved companionship, but there were not 
many patients to whom I cared to talk. I did, however, 
greatly desire to engage the assistant physician in conversa- 
tion, as he was a man of some education and familiar with 
the history of my case. It will be recalled that the assistant 
physician at the sanatorium subjected me to mechanical 
restraint on the plea of protecting me against myself, and 
later, with disgusting brutality, assaulted me. The assist- 
ant physician who now had me in charge acted with a like 
inconsistency. When my vocal cords were bound as with a 
chain, by delusions, he had tried to induce me to speak. 
Now, when I was at last willing to talk, he would scarcely 
condescend to listen. What seemed to me his studied and 
ill-disguised avoidance only served to whet my desire to 
detain him whenever possible. Of course my flow of words 
was interminable. To listen to all of it would have been 
unbearable, — and, indeed, physically impossible for a doc- 
tor with duties to other patients as well as to myself. Yet a 
physician genuinely interested in his work would, as I 
continue to think, have been glad to observe my case more 
closely than this one did — for scientific if not humanitarian 
reasons. That I do him no injustice I am led to believe 
by his subsequent conduct. He was content to act as a 
sort of monitor, to which role he added that of despot 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 93 

when anything arose to interrupt the even tenor of his almost 
automatic supervision. 

It was about the second week that my investigating and 
reformatory turn of mind became acute. The ward in 
which I was confined was well furnished and as home-like 
as such a place could be, though in justice to my own home 
I must observe that the resemblance was not great. About 
the so-called "violent" ward I had far less favorable ideas. 
Though I had not been subjected to physical abuse dur- 
ing the first fourteen months of my stay in this institution, 
I had seen unnecessary and oftentimes brutal force used by 
the attendants in the restraint of several so-called "violent" 
patients, who, upon their arrival, had been placed in the ward 
where I was. I had also heard convincing rumors of rough 
treatment of irresponsible patients in the violent ward. Of 
course the rules of the institution forbade such treatment (as 
the rules of all such institutions invariably do) except on 
those rare occasions when attendants are obliged to act in 
self-defense. 

Having a world of energy to dispense I determined to 
conduct a thorough investigation of the institution. In 
order that I might have proof that my intended action was 
deUberate, my first move was to tell one or two feUow-patients 
that I should soon transgress some rule in such a way as 
to necessitate my removal to the violent ward. At first I 
thought of breaking a few panes of glass; but my purpose 
was accomplished in another way — and, indeed, sooner 
than I had anticipated. My conservator, in my presence, 
had told the assistant physician that the doctors could per- 
mit me to telephone to him whenever they should see fit. It 
was rather with the wish to test the unfriendly physician^ 
than to satisfy any desire to speak with my conservator, that 
one morning I asked permission to call the latter up on the 



94 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

telephone. That very morning I had received a letter from 
him. This the doctor knew, for I showed him the letter — 
but not its contents. It was on the letter that I based my 
pretext, though it did not even intimate that my brother 
wished to speak to me. The doctor, however, had no way 
of laiowing that my statement was not true. To deny my 
request was simply one of his ill-advised whims, and his re- 
fusal was given with customary curtness and contempt. I 
met his refusal in kind, and presented him with a critique 
of his character couched in my tersest English. 

Said he, "Unless you stop talking in that way I shall have 
you transferred to the Fourth Ward." (The Fourth was 
the "violent" ward.) 

"Put me where you please," was my reply. "I'll put 
you in the gutter before I get through with you." 

With that the doctor made good his threat, and the at- 
tendant escorted me to the violent ward — a willing, in 
fact, eager prisoner. 

The ward in which I was now placed (Saturday, Septem- 
ber 13th, 1902) was furnished in the plainest manner. The 
floors were of hard wood and the walls were bare. Except 
when at meals or out of doors taking their accustomed exer- 
cise, the patients usually sat together in one large room. In 
this, only heavy benches were used to sit upon. Such tempt- 
ing weapons as chairs were deemed inexpedient. It was 
thought that in the hands of violent patients they might be- 
come a menace to the attendants and to other patients. In 
the dining-room, however, wooden chairs of a substantial 
type were allowed, for patients seldom run amuck at meal 
time. Nevertheless, one of the chairs in that room soon 
acquired a history, part of which must be related. 

As my banishment had come about on short notice I had 
failed to provide myself with many things I could have de- 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 95 

sired. My first request was that I be supplied with station- 
ery. The attendants, acting no doubt on the doctor's orders, 
refused to grant my request ; nor would they give me a lead 
pencil — which, luckily, I did not need, for I happened to 
be already possessed of one. Despite their refusal I man- 
aged to get some scraps of paper, on which I was soon busily 
engaged in writing notes to those in authority. Some of 
these (as I learned later) were dehvered, but no attention 
was paid to them. No doctor came near me until evening, 
when the one who had banished me made his regular round 
of inspection. When he appeared the interrupted conversa- 
tion of the morning was resumed — that is, by me, — and 
in a similar strain. I again asked leave to telephone my 
conservator. I knew that on Sunday I could not make con- 
nections, so I asked for permission to telephone on Mon- 
day. The doctor again refused, and I, of course, told him 
what I thought of him. 

My imprisonment pleased me. I was where I most wished 
to be, and I busied myself investigating conditions and re- 
cording mental notes. As the assistant physician could 
grant favors to the attendants, and had authority either to 
retain or discharge them, they did his bidding and continued 
to refuse most of my requests. In spite of their unfriendly 
attitude, however, I did manage to persuade the supervisor 
to dehver a note to the steward. In it I asked him to come 
at once, as I wished to talk with him. The steward, whom 
I looked upon as a friend, returned no answer and made no 
visit. I supposed he, too, had purposely ignored me. As 
I learned afterwards, both he and the superintendent were 
absent, else perhaps I should have been treated in a less 
high-handed manner by the assistant physician. 

The next morning, after a renewal of my request and a 
repeated refusal, I asked the doctor to send me the "Book 



96 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

of Psalms" which I had had in my former room. With this 
request he complied, believing, perhaps, that some religion 
would at least do me no harm. I probably read my favorite 
psalm, the forty- fifth; but most of my time I spent writing 
on the fly-leaves psalms of my own. And if the value of a 
psalm is to be measured by the intensity of feeling por- 
trayed, my compositions of that day rightly belonged beside 
the writings of David. My psalms were indited to those 
in authority at the hospital, and later in the day the super- 
visor — who proved himself a friend on many occasions — 
took the book to headquarters. 

The assistant physician, who had mistaken my malevolent 
tongue for a violent mind, had placed me in an exile which 
precluded my attendance upon the service which was held 
in the chapel that Sunday afternoon. Time which might 
better have been spent in church I therefore spent in per- 
fecting a somewhat ingenious scheme for getting in touch 
with the steward. That evening when the doctor again ap- 
peared I approached him in a friendly way and politely 
repeated my request. He again refused to grant it. With 
an air of resignation I said, "Well, as it seems useless to 
argue the point with you, and as the notes sent to others 
have thus far been ignored, I should like, with your kind 
permission, to kick a hole in your damned old building and 
to-morrow present myself to the steward in his ofl&ce." 

"Kick away!" said he with a sneer. He then entered an 
adjoining ward, where he remained for about ten minutes. 

If you will draw in your mind, or on paper, a letter "L," 
and let the upright part represent a room forty feet in length, 
and the horizontal part one of twenty, and if you will then 
picture me as standing in a doorway at the intersection of 
these two lines, and the doctor behind another door at the 
top of the perpendicular, forty feet away, you will have rep- 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 



97 



resented graphically the opposing armies just prior to the 
first real assault in what proved to be a siege of seven weeks. 

The moment the doctor re-entered the ward, as he had to 
do to return to the office, I disappeared through my door — 
into the dining-room. I then walked the length of this room 
and picked up one of the heavy wooden chairs, selected for 
the purpose in view while the doctor and his tame charges 
were at church. Using the chair as a battering-ram, without 
malice — joy being in my heart — I deliberately thrust two 
of its legs through an upper and a lower pane of a four- 
paned plate glass window. The only miscalculation I made 
was in failing to place myself directly in front of that 
window, and at a proper distance, so that I might have 
broken every one of the four panes. This was a source of 
regret to me, and well it might have been so, for I am loath 
to leave a well thought-out piece of work unfinished. 

The crash of shattered and falling glass startled every one 
but me. Particularly did it frighten one patient who hap- 
pened to be in the dining-room at the time. He fled. The 
doctor and the attendant who were in the next room could 
not see me, or know what the trouble was; but they lost no 
time in finding out. Within two or three seconds they ap- 
peared, in a state of great excitement. Like the proverbial 
cold-blooded murderer who stands over his victim, weapon 
in hand, calmly awaiting arrest, I stood my ground, and, 
with a fair degree of poise, awaited the onrush of doctor and 
attendant. These soon had me in hand. Each taking an 
arm they marched me to my room. This consumed not 
more than half a minute, but the time was not so short as 
to prevent my delivering myself of one more thumb-nail 
characterization of the doctor. . My inability to recall that 
delineation, verbatim, entails no loss on literature, for, I 
fear, my words approached an unprintable perfection. But 



98 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

one remark made as the doctor seized hold of me was apt, 
though not impromptu. I had framed the sally several 
hours earlier. "Well, doctor, knowing you to be a truthful 
man, I just took you at your word," said I. 

Senseless as this act of mine appears it was, like so many 
acts of the insane, the result of logical thinking. Indeed, 
logical thinking among the insane is common, rather than 
rare. But the logical faculty in an insane person is usu- 
ally of sHght advantage to him, for he reasons either from 
a false premise, or reasoning correctly he betrays his insane 
condition when he attempts to apply his logic to a given 
situation. An illuminating example of an insane appli- 
cation of sound logic is afforded by the incident I am now 
discussing. The steward had entire charge of the building 
and ordered all necessary repairs. It was he whom I de- 
sired above all others to see, and I reasoned that the break- 
ing of several dollars' worth of plate glass (for which, 
later, to my surprise, I had to pay) would compel his atten- 
tion on grounds of economy, if not those of the friendly 
interest which I now believed he had abandoned. Early 
the next morning, as I had hoped, the steward appeared. 
He approached me in a friendly way (as had been his wont) 
and I met him in a like manner. Said he, good-naturedly, 
"I wish you would leave a little bit of the building." 

"I will leave it all, and gladly, if you will pay some atten- 
tion to my messages," said I. 

"Had I not been out of town," said he, "I would have 
come to see you sooner." And this honest excuse I believed 
and accepted. 

I made known to the steward the assistant physician's be- 
havior in balking my desire to telephone my conservator. 
He agreed to place the matter before the superintendent, 
who had that morning returned. As proof of gratitude, 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 99 

I promised to suspend hostilities until I had had a talk 
with the superintendent. I made it quite plain, however, 
that should he fail to keep his word, I would further facili- 
tate the ventilation of the violent ward — not a polite thing 
to say, but my faith in mankind was not yet wholly re- 
stored. 



XIV 

A FEW hours later, without having witnessed anything of 
particular significance, except as it befeU myself, I was trans- 
ferred to my old ward. The superintendent, who had or- 
dered this rehabihtation, soon appeared, and he and I had a 
satisfactory talk. He gave me to understand that he him- 
self would look after my case, as he reaHzed that his assist- 
ant lacked the requisite tact and judgment to cope with one 
of my temperament — and with that, my desire to telephone 
my conservator vanished. 

Now no physician would Hke to have his wings cHpped by 
an insane patient, even indirectly, and without doubt the 
man's pride was piqued as his incompetence was thus made 
patent. Thereafter when he passed through the ward he 
and I had frequent tilts. Not only did I lose no opportunity 
to behttle him in the presence of attendants and patients, but 
I even created such opportunities; so that before long he 
studiously avoided me whenever possible. But it seldom 
was possible. My chief amusement consisted in what were 
really one-sided interviews with him. Occasionally he was 
so unwise as to stand his ground for several minutes, and 
his arguments on such occasions served only to keep my tem- 
per at a vituperative heat. If there were any epithets which 
I failed to apply to him during the succeeding weeks of my 
association with him they must have been coined since. I 
am no candidate for the reputation which attaches to mean 
tongues; but I wish to give some slight excuse for the hateful 
way in which this man treated me when I finally fell into 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF loi 

his power. The fact is that the uncanny admixture of san- 
ity displayed by me, despite my insane condition, was some- 
thing this doctor could not comprehend. Remarks of mine, 
therefore, which should have been discounted or ignored, 
rankled in his breast as the insults of a sane and free man 
would have done. No doubt a rare degree of tact was what 
was required for the proper and continued control of a 
patient of my temperatment. Yet I am sure a judicious 
granting of requests, or a helpful refusal, would have 
contributed to an earher recovery and insured a less stormy 
period of convalesence. For a mind as active as mine to 
be contented for long was out of the question; yet I know 
that the blunt and indiscriminate refusal of most of my re- 
quests prolonged my period of mental excitement ; whereas, 
fair treatment would have restored me to health, freedom, 
and society several months earher. The loss of time is of 
small moment, but the risk of irreparable injury which 
I was forced to assume is not to be hghtly regarded. That 
some curable cases of insanity have been made chronic 
by just such treatment as I was fortunate enough to survive 
is an indisputable fact, — direct proof whereof can never be 
offered by these hapless ones, for they are now in their graves 
— living graves, some of them. 

When my period of depression gave way to one of elation, 
an ultimate, if temporary recovery at least was assured. 
What followed was a period of convalescence, and the doc- 
tors knew that the return of my brain to its normal condition 
would be only a question of time, — though they could not 
predict whether normahty would long continue, for cycles 
of depression and elation tend to recur in a brain that has 
once been so affected. Surely I was entitled to the sanest 
of treatment from the very moment the state of comparative 
sanity manifested itself. Instead, I was soon subjected to 



I02 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

treatment so brutal that I might not have survived it had 
I not been blessed with a strong constitution and a virile 
hope. 

After my return to my old ward I remained there for a 
period of three weeks. At that time I was a very self-cen- 
tered individual. My large and varied assortment of delu- 
sions of grandeur made everything seem possible. There 
were few problems I hesitated to attack. With sufficient 
provocation I even attacked attendants — problems in 
themselves; but such fights as I subsequently engaged in 
were fights, either for my own rights or the rights of 
others. Though for a while I got along fairly well with 
the attendants and as well as could be expected with the 
assistant physician, it soon became evident that these men 
felt that to know me more was to love me less. Owing 
to their lack of capacity for the work required of them, 
I was able to cause them endless annoyance. Many 
times a day I would instruct the attendants what to do 
and what not to do, and tell them what I should do 
if my requests, suggestions, or orders were not immedi- 
ately complied with. For over one year the attendants 
had seen me in a passive, almost speechless condition, and 
they were, therefore, unable to understand my unwonted 
aggressions. The threat that I would chastise them for any 
disobedience of my orders they looked upon as a huge joke. 
So it was, until one day I incontinently cracked that joke 
against the head of one of them. 

It began in this wise: Early in October a man was com- 
mitted to my ward whose abnormality for the most part con- 
sisted of an inordinate thirst for hquor. He did not appear 
to me to be really insane, nor, according to report, had he 
ever been so, except as thousands of free men are who have 
poisoned their systems with strong drink. He was over 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 103 

fifty years of age, well educated, traveled, refined and of an 
artistic temperament. Congenial companions were scarce 
where I was, and he and I were soon drawn together in 
friendship. This man had been trapped into the institu- 
tion by the subterfuge of relatives. As is common in such 
cases many ''white" Kes had been resorted to in order to 
save trouble for all concerned, — that is, all except the pa- 
tient. To be taken vsdthout notice from one's home and 
by a deceitful, though, under the circumstances, perhaps 
justifiable strategy, placed in a ward with fifteen other men, 
aU exhibiting insanity in varying degrees, is as heartbreak- 
ing an ordeal as one can well imagine. Yet such was this 
man's experience. A free man one day, he found himself 
deprived of his liberty the next, and branded with what he 
at the time considered an unbearable disgrace. In justice 
to the relatives of this man, however, it is but fair to credit 
them with good intentions. They simply erred through ig- 
norance. Like ninety-nine out of a hundred persons so 
situated, they did not know that it is not only safe, but ad- 
visable, to tell the afflicted one the truth, and nothing but 
the truth — after his mental condition has been passed upon 
by competent authorities and arrangements have been made 
for his transfer to a public or private hospital. This point 
I have discussed with physicians who have had placed under 
their care hundreds of insane persons. Their advice may 
be summed up as folio V\^s: After the relatives of an insane 
person, or of a person threatened with insanity, have reached 
the point where commitment of the patient has become in- 
evitable, let them act with decision, tact, and honesty. First 
complete the arrangements for the transfer of the patient 
to the hospital; then shortly before the transfer is to be made, 
teU the patient frankly why such action has been taken or 
tell him earlier, provided he be kept constantly under the 



I04 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

care of a nurse — this to guard against any overt act induced 
by that innate and sometimes overpowering dread of con- 
finement in a hospital for the insane.^ Emphasize the fact 
that a mental disorder cannot be treated properly at home, 
and that the patient will stand a better chance for recovery 
in an institution than out of one, — which is true. Assure 
the patient that he will be visited often by relatives and 
friends, and impress upon him that his every interest will 
be safeguarded. Then keep such promises to the letter. 
Experience teaches that a patient who is treated honestly 
from the beginning usually enters a hospital with compar- 
atively slight reluctance. Further, he is quick to appreciate 
the advantages of hospital treatment, — indeed, he frequently 
appreciates its benefits much sooner than those who effected 
his commitment. Thus, by a firm, tactful, honest method 
of procedure, a patient's confidence in his relatives, friends 
and the hospital authorities is at once established and easily 
maintained, with incalculable benefit to all; whereas, on the 
other hand, subterfuge and "white" lies — which are so 
often black lies, undermine the confidence of the patient, 
make him unhappy, delay his recovery, and seriously ham- 
per the hospital officials in their appointed work. 

Mr. Blank (as I shall call him) was completely unnerved. 

' As laws regarding commitment are not uniform throughout the coun- 
try, it would be necessary in some States to tell the patient, earlier than is 
here suggested, of his impending transfer to a hospital. Thus do imper- 
fect statutes help to make worse a situation already distressing. Another 
source of trouble is an ignorant handling of the patient, on his way to a hos- 
pital. Trained attendants should be called in at such a time, as is required 
by law in some States. A general adoption of this law will put a stop to the 
humiliating, oftentimes cruel, and invariably unnecessary hand-cuffing and 
binding of insane persons while being transferred to an institution. It 
seems fair that nurses rather than ignorant, and perhaps unfeeling, officers 
of the law, should be placed in charge of a person who need plead guilty to 
no charge other than that of being in ill-health. 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 105 

As he was a stranger in what I well knew was a strange 
world I took him under my protecting and commodious 
wing. I did all I could to cheer him up, and tried to secure 
for him from the attendants that consideration which I 
deemed indispensable to his well-being. Patients in his 
condition had never been forced, when taking their exercise, 
to walk about the grounds with the other patients. At no 
time during the preceding fourteen months had I seen a 
newly-committed patient forced to exercise against his will. 
One who objected was invariably left in the ward, or his 
refusal reported to the doctor before further steps were 
resorted to. No sane person need stretch his imagination 
in order to reahze how humiliating it would be for this man 
to walk with a crowd which greatly resembled a "chain- 
gang." Two by two, guarded by an attendant — usually 
two attendants — these hostages of misfortune get the only 
long walks their restricted liberty allows them. After the 
one or two occasions when this man did walk with the gang 
I was impressed with the not wholly unreasonable thought 
that the physical exercise in no way compensated for the 
mental distress which the sense of humiliation and disgrace 
caused him to suffer. It was therefore delightfully easy for 
me to interfere in his behalf; and when he came to my room, 
wrought up over the prospect of another such humiliation 
and weeping bitterly, I assured him that he should take his 
exercise that day when I did. My first move to accomplish 
the desired result was to approach, in a friendly way, the 
attendant in charge, and ask him to permit my new friend to 
walk about the grounds with me when next I went. He 
said he would do nothing of the kind — that he intended to 
take this man when he took the others. Said I, " For over 
a year I have been in this ward and so have you, and I have 



io6 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

never yet seen a man in Mr. Blank's condition forced to go 
out of doors." 

"It makes no difference whether you have or not," said 
the attendant, "he's going." 

"Will you ask the doctor whether Mr. Blank can or can- 
not walk about the grounds with my special attendant when 
I go?" 

"No, I won't. Furthermore, it's none of your business." 

"If you resort to physical force and attempt to take Mr. 
Blank with the other patients, you'll wish you hadn't," 
said I, and I walked away. 

At this threat the attendant scornfully laughed. To him 
it meant nothing. He believed I could fight only with my 
tongue, and I confess that I myself was in doubt as to my 
power of fighting otherwise. 

Returning to my room where Mr. Blank was in waiting, 
I supported his drooping courage and again assured him 
that he should be spared the dreaded ordeal. I ordered 
him to go to a certain room at the farther end of the hall and 
there await developments — so that, should there be a fight, 
the line of battle might be a long one. He obeyed. In a 
minute or two the attendant was headed for that room. I 
followed closely at his heels, still threatening to attack him 
if he dared so much as lay a finger on my friend. Though 
I was not then aware of it, I was followed by another pa- 
tient, a man, who, though insane, had his lucid intervals and 
always a loyal heart. He seemed to realize that trouble 
was impending and that very likely I should need help. 
Once in the room the war of words was renewed, my sensi- 
tive and unnerved friend standing by and looking anxiously 
on. 

"I warn you once more," said I, to the attendant, "if you 
touch Mr. Blank I'll punch you so hard you'll wish you 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 107 

hadn't." The attendant's answer was an immediate at- 
tempt to eject Mr. Blank from the room by force. Nothing 
could be more automatic than my action at that time; — 
indeed, to this day I do not remember performing the act 
itself. What I remember is the determination to perform 
it and the subsequent evidence of its having been performed. 
I remember every part of the encounter except the one in- 
stant devoted to the execution of my predetermined coup de 
main. At all events I had already made up my mind to do 
a certain thing if the attendant did a certain thing. He did 
the one and I did the other. Almost before he had touched 
Mr. Blank's person my right fist struck him with great force 
in, on, or about the left eye. It was then that I became the 
object of the attendant's attention — but not his undivided 
attention — for, as he was choking me, my unsuspected ally 
stepped up and paid the attendant a sincere compliment by 
likewise choking him. In the scufHe I was forced to the 
floor. The attendant had a hand upon my throat. My 
ward-mate had both hands upon the attendant's throat. 
Thus was formed a chain with a weak, if not a missing, link 
in the middle. Picture if you wiU an insane man being 
choked by a supposedly sane man, and he in turn being 
choked by a temporarily sane insane friend of the assaulted 
one, and you will have Nemesis more nearly in a nutshell 
than any mere rhetorician has yet been able to put her. 

That I was well choked is proved by the fact that my 
throat bore the crescent-shaped mark of my assailant's 
thumb nail. And I am inclined to believe that my rescuer, 
who was a very powerful man, made a decided impression 
on the attendant's throat. Had not the superintendent op- 
portunely appeared at that moment the attendant might 
soon have lapsed into unconsciousness, for I am sure my 
ally would never have released him until he should have 



lo8 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

released me. The moment the attendant with his one good 
eye caught sight of the superintendent the scrimmage ended. 
This was but natural, for it is an offense against the code 
of honor generally obtaining among attendants that one 
should so far forget himseK as to abuse patients in the pres- 
ence of sane and competent witnesses. 

The choking which I had just received only served to 
limber my vocal cords. I told the doctor all about the pre- 
liminary verbal skirmish and the needlessness of the fight. 
The superintendent had graduated at Yale over fifty years 
prior to my own graduation, and because of our common 
interests and his consummate tact we got along well together. 
But his friendly interest did not keep him from speaking his 
mind upon occasions, as his words at this time proved. " You 
don't know how it grieves me to see you — a Yale man — 
act so like a rowdy," said he. 

"If fighting for the rights of a much older man, unable to 
protect his own interests, is the act of a rowdy, I'm quite 
wUling to be thought one," was my reply. 

Need I add that the attendant did not take Mr. Blank 
for a walk that morning? Nor, so far as I know, was the 
latter ever forced again to take his exercise against his will. 



I have devoted much space to the foregoing incident be- 
cause it represents fairly a majority of the assaults now 
committed in our asylums. Had the attendant possessed 
and exercised tact, there would have been no needless as- 
sault committed that day. In my opinion the number of 
fights or assaults caused by insane patients running amuck 
is smaller, relatively, than the number of fights that would 
naturally occur among a given number of schoolboys, full 
of animal spirits. Nine out of ten of the hundreds of as- 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 109 

saults which occur annually in our hospitals and asylums 
are the fault of the attendants rather than of their charges. 
It is therefore evident that the solution of the problem of 
eliminating brutality centers in the attendants, the majority 
of whom to-day are deplorably incompetent. In fact the 
only attendants who are not likely at times to commit out- 
rages are those who at heart are believers in llHon- 
Restraint ; " — and that more of them do not use that 
humane method of treatment is the fault of the doctors 
in charge. 



XV 

The superintendent now realized that I was altogether 
too energetic a humanitarian to remain in a ward with so 
many other patients. My actions had a demoralizing effect 
upon them; so I was forthwith transferred to a private room, 
one of two situated in a small one-story annex. These new 
quarters were rather attractive, and not unlike a conven- 
tional bachelor apartment. 

As there was no one here with whom I could interfere I 
got along without making any disturbance — that is, so 
long as I had a certain special attendant, a man suited to my 
temperament. He who was now placed over me understood 
human nature and could recognize it even in an insane man. 
He never resorted to force if argument failed to move me; 
and trifling transgressions, which would have led to a fight 
had he behaved hke a typical attendant, he either ignored 
or privately reported to the doctor. This competent attend- 
ant, whom I Hked, could and did control me with ease. As 
it is in the world at large, so in asylums likes and dislikes 
are usually mutual. Accordingly, for the whole period of 
my intense excitement there were certain doctors and at- 
tendants who could control me, and certain other doctors 
and attendants whose presence threw me into a state border- 
ing on rage, and frequently into passions which led to dis- 
tressing results. To place over me those I hked, rather than 
attempt to make me adjust my unruly personality to those 
I hated, would have cost attention and perhaps inconven- 
ience. But would not the reward have been worth the pains ? 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF iii 

And if hospitals exist for the purpose of restoring patients 
to health, was I not of right entitled to all such benefits ? 

Good attendants seldom stay long at their work, for their 
rewards are insignificant, if not insulting. Unfortunately 
for me, my good attendant soon left the institution to accept 
a more attractive business offer. He left without even a 
good-by to me. Nothing proves more conclusively how 
important to me would have been his retention than this 
abrupt leave-taking which the doctor had evidently ordered, 
thinking perhaps that the prospect of a change of attendants 
would excite me. However, I caused no trouble when the 
substitution was made, though I did dislike the idea of hav- 
ing placed over me a man with whom I had previously had 
misunderstandings. He was about my own age and it was by 
no means so easy to take orders from him as it had been to 
obey his immediate predecessor who was considerably older 
than myself. Then, too, this young attendant dishked me 
because of the many disagreeable things I had said to him 
while I was confined in a general ward. He weighed about 
one hundred ninety pounds to my one hundred thirty, and 
had evidently been delegated to attend me because of his 
great physical strength. But I am incHned to think that a 
choice based on mental rather than physical considerations 
would have been wiser. The superintendent, because of 
his advanced age and ill health, had been obhged again to 
place my case in the hands of the assistant physician, and 
the latter gave this new attendant certain orders. What I 
was to be permitted to do, and what not, was carefully 
specified. These orders, many of them unreasonable, were 
carried out to the letter. For this I cannot justly blame the 
attendant. The doctor had deprived him of the right to 
exercise what judgment he had. 

At this period I required but little sleep. I usually spent 



112 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

part of the night drawing; for it was in September, 1902, 
while I was at the height of my wave of self-centered con- 
fidence, that a friend who came to see me had given me a 
copy of Life. And as I had already decided in my own 
mind that I was destined to become a writer of books — or 
at least of one -book ^^ I, thought I might as well be an artist, 
too, and illustrate my own productions.. In school I had 
never Qet^'^ 'for draw^iiTg; nor at college, either, where, at 
the Yale Art School, I took a compulsory and distasteful 
course in that subject. But now my awakened artistic im- 
pulse was irresistible. My first self-imposed lesson was a 
free-hand copy of the design on the cover of Life, includ- 
ing the illustration. Considering the circumstances, that 
first drawing was creditable, though I cannot now prove the 
assertion; for inconsiderate attendants destroyed it, with 
many more of my drawings and manuscripts. From the 
very moment I completed that first drawing, honors were 
divided between my literary and artistic impulses; and a 
letter which, in due time, I was impelled to write to the Gov- 
ernor of the State incorporated art with literature. I wrote 
and read several hours a day and I spent as many more, 
drawing. But the assistant physician, instead of making it 
easy for me to rid myseK of an excess of energy along literary 
and artistic lines, balked me at every turn, and seemed to 
deKght in displaying as little interest as possible in my newly 
awakened ambitions. So that at a time when everything 
should have been done to calm my abnormally active mind, 
a studied indifference and failure to protect my interests 
kept me in a state of constant exasperation. 

But circumstances now arose which brought about the 
imtimely stifling — I might better say strangulation — of 
my artistic impulses. The doctors were led — unwisely, I 
believe, considering their methods and the hospital's equip- 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 113 

ment — to decide that absolute seclusion was the only thing 
that would ease my over-active brain. In consequence, all 
writing and drawing materials and all books were taken from 
me. And from October i8th until the first of the following 
January, except for one short fortnight, my brain was left 
again to all but beat itself into an insane condition, either 
against itself, or the bare walls and floors of the small, barred 
rooms in which I was next confined — hardly better than 
cells in a State's prison and in some instances far worse. 

A corn-cob was the determining factor at this crisis. See- 
ing in myself an embryonic Raphael I had a habit of 
preserving all kinds of odds and ends as souvenirs of my 
development. These, I believed, sanctified by my Midas-like 
touch, would one day be of great value. If the pubHc can 
tolerate, as it does, thousands of souvenir hunters, surely an 
inmate of an asylum should be indulged in the whim for 
collecting such souvenirs as come within his reach. Among 
the odds and ends which I had gathered were several corn- 
cobs. These I intended to gild and make useful by attach- 
ing to them smaU thermometers. If they seemed valuable 
to me at the time, that fact in itself should have been reason 
enough for permitting me to retain them. But, on the morn- 
ing of October i8th, my athletic attendant, finding them, 
forthwith informed me that he should throw them away. 
I as promptly informed him that any such action on his 
part would lead to a fight. And so it did.^ 

1 Though I admit that the impulse to collect souvenirs must be held in 
check, lest a patient's room become a sort of jimk-shop, I will not admit 
that the " souvenir habit" can best be cured by a resort to force — and abu- 
sive language. A tactful appeal to a patient's sense of right and justice will 
invariably accomplish a better and more lasting result. Witness the case 
of the attendant whose insane charge had jumped into a deep river with the 
mad desire to drown himself. "If you don't come back here I'll lose my 
job!" shouted the attendant in desperation. The prospective suicide heard 
9 



114 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

When this fight began there were two attendants at hand'. 
I fought them both to a standstill, and told them I should 
continue to fight until the assistant physician came to the 
ward. Thereupon, my special attendant, realizing that I 
meant what I said, held me while the other went for assist- 
ance. He soon returned, not with the assistant physician, 
but with a third attendant, and the fight was renewed. The 
one who had acted as messenger, being of finer fiber than 
the other two, stood at a safe distance. It was of course 
against the rules of the institution for an attendant to strike 
a patient, and, as I was sane enough to report with a fair 
chance of belief any forbidden blows, each captor had to 
content himself with holding me by an arm and attempting 
to choke me into submission. However, I was able to pre- 
vent them from getting a good grip on my throat, and for 
almost ten minutes I continued to fight, telling them all the 
time that I would not desist until a doctor should come. 
An assistant physician, but not the one in charge of my 
case, finally appeared. He ordered the attendants to place 
me in the "violent ward," which adjoined the private apart- 
ment I was then occupying, and they lost no time in lock- 
ing me in a small room in that ward. 

This first fight of the day occurred about 8 a.m. — a fact 
which should be noted, for October i8th, 1902, was about 
the busiest day of my life. Three fights between simrise 
and sunset, and two other incidents not less full of action, 
and one of them full of torture, give that day a distinctive 
character. 

Friends have said to me: "Well, what is to be done 
with an insane man when he runs amuck?" The best 

the appeal, swam ashore, was saved, and to-day enjoys health and freedom. 
The truth of this incident is vouched for by Dr. Adolf Meyer, of New York. 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 115 

answer I can make is: "Do nothing to make him run 
amuck." 

A man in the condition in which I was during the period 
of my elation is a spoiled child. If he wants a thing, harm- 
less to himself and to others, he should have it. A hospital 
for the insane must answer many of the purposes of a kin- 
dergarten and, at times, may well be turned into one. The 
greater initial expenditure entailed in the individual treat- 
ment of a case would be offset by the more rapid recovery 
and earlier discharge of the patient. While I was on the 
rampage, not more than four or five others under the care 
of the assistant physician required especial attention. But I 
required it, and, realizing this, I did my best to get it. 
Certain psychiatrists support me in the opinion that 
had I had an attendant with the wisdom and ability to 
humor me and permit me to keep my priceless corn-cobs, 
the fight in question, and the worse events that followed, 
would not have occurred — not that day, nor ever, I believe, 
had I at all times been properly treated by those in charge 
of me. 

So again I foimd myself in the violent ward — but this 
time not because of any desire to investigate it. Art and 
literature being now more engrossing than my plans for re- 
form, I became, in truth, an unwilling occupant of a room 
in a ward devoid of even a suggestion of the aesthetic. The 
room itself was clean, and under other circumstances might 
have been cheerful. It was twelve feet long, seven feet 
wide, and twelve high. A cluster of incandescent lights, 
enclosed in a semi-spherical glass globe, depended from the 
ceiling. The walls were bare and plainly wainscotted, 
and one large window, barred without, gave light. At 
one side of the door was an opening a foot square with a 



ii6 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

door of its own which could be opened only from without, 
and through which food could be passed to a supposedly 
dangerous patient. Aside from an iron cot bed, screwed 
to the floor, the room had no furniture. 

The attendant, before locking me in, searched me and took 
from me several lead pencils; but the stub of one escaped his 
vigilance. Naturally, to be taken from a handsomely fur- 
nished apartment and thrust into such a bare and unattrac- 
tive room as this, caused my already heated blood to 
approach the boiling point. Consequently, my first thought 
was to send a note to the physician who regularly had 
charge of my case, requesting him to visit me as soon as he 
should arrive — and I have every reason to believe that the 
note was delivered. Whether or not this was so, a report 
of the morning's fight and my transfer must have reached 
him by some one of the several witnesses. While waiting 
for an answer, I busied myself writing, and as I had no 
better supply of stationery I wrote on the walls. Begin- 
ning as high at I could reach I wrote in columns, each about 
three feet wide. Soon the pencil became dull. But dull 
pencils are easily sharpened on the whetstone of wit. Stifling 
acquired traits, I permitted myself to revert momentarily to 
a primitive expedient. I gnawed the wood quite from the 
pencil, leaving only the graphite core. With a bit of graphite 
a hand guided by the unerring insolence of elation may ar- 
tistically damn aU men and things. That I am inclined to 
beheve I did; and I question whether Raphael or Michael 
Angelo — upon whom I then looked as mere predecessors 
— ever put more feeHng per square foot into their mural 
masterpieces. 

Every Httle while, as if to punctuate my composition, and 
in a vain endeavor to get attention, I kicked the door vigor- 
ously. Knowing the history of my case, the assistant physi- 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 117 

cian when he learned of my transfer should have made a 
special visit. But this he neglected to do. Not until eleven 
o'clock, on his regular round of inspection, did he come near 
me. As a result I was left for three hours to thrash around 
that room and work myself into a state of desperate rage. I 
made up my mind to compel attention. A month earlier, 
shattered glass had enabled me to accompHsh a certain sane 
purpose. Again this day it served me. The opalescent 
globe at the ceiHng seemed to be the most vulnerable point 
for attack. How to reach and smash it was the next ques- 
tion — and soon answered. Taking off my shoes I threw 
one with great force at my glass target and succeeded in 
striking it a destructive blow. 

When attendants' ears become as nicely attuned to the 
suppliant cries of neglected patients as they now are to the 
summoning sound of breaking glass, many of the abuses of 
which I complain will cease forever to be heard of. The 
attendants charged upon my room. Their entrance was 
momentarily delayed by the door which stuck fast. I was 
standing near it, and when it gave way its edge struck me on 
the forehead with force enough to have fractured my skull 
had it struck a weaker part. The attendants were unable 
to see me, and for this hurt no blame attached to them, ex- 
cept in so far as it was the indirect result of their continued 
neglect of me. 

Once in the room the two attendants threw me on the bed 
and choked me so severely that I could feel my eyes start- 
ing from their sockets. When attendants choke patients 
they do so in a bungling manner — even those who have 
conducted the brutal operation often enough to have mas- 
tered the technique of it. As it was, a clumsy fellow filled 
his fist with most of the muscles in my neck and then pro- 
ceeded to manipulate my throat much as one would squeeze 



Ii8 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

a sponge. The attendants then put the room in order; re- 
moved the glass — that is, all except one small and apparently 
innocent, but as the event proved well-nigh fatal, piece, — 
took my shoes and again locked me in my room — not for- 
getting, however, to curse me well for making them work 
for their living. 

When the assistant physician finally appeared I met him 
with a blast of invective which, in view of the events which 
quickly followed, must have blown out whatever spark of 
kindly feeling toward me he may have ever entertained. I 
demanded that he permit me to send word to my conserva- 
tor asking him to come at once and look after my interests, 
for I was being unfairly treated. I also demanded that he 
request the superintendent to visit me at once, as I intended 
to have nothing more to do with assistant physicians or at- 
tendants who were neglecting and abusing me. He yielded 
to neither demand. 

The bit of glass, which the attendants had overlooked, 
was as large as my thumb nail. If I remember rightly it 
was not a part of the broken globe. It was a piece that had 
probably been hidden by a former occupant, in a comer of 
the square opening at the side of the door. At all events, 
if the pen is the tongue of a ready writer, so may a piece of 
glass be, under given conditions. As the thought I had in 
mind seemed an immortal one I decided to etch, rather than 
write with fugitive graphite. On the topmost panel of the 
door, which a few minutes before had dealt me so vicious a 
blow, I scratched a seven-word sentiment — sincere, if not 
classic: "God bless our Home, which is Hell." 

The violent exercise of the morning had given me a good 
appetite and I ate my dinner with relish, though with some 
difficulty, for the choking had lamed my throat. On serving 
this dinner the attendants again left me to my own devices. 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 119 

The early part of the afternoon I spent in vain endeavors to 
induce them to take notes to the superintendent and his 
assistant. They continued to ignore me. By sundown the 
furious excitement of the morning had given place to what 
might be called a deliberative excitement, which, if anything, 
was more effective. It was but a few days earlier that I had 
discussed my case with the assistant physician and told him 
all about the suicidal impulse which had been so strong 
during my entire period of depression. I now reasoned that 
a seeming attempt at suicide, a "fake" suicide, would frighten 
the attendants into calling this doctor whose presence I now 
desired — and desired the more because of his persistent 
indifference. No man that ever lived loved life more than 
I did on that day, and my mock tragedy which I successfully 
played about dusk was, I believe, as good a farce as was ever 
perpetrated. If I had any one ambition it was to live long 
enough to regain my freedom and put behind iron bars this 
doctor and his tools, the attendants. To compel attention 
— that was my object. 

At that season the sun set by half-past five and supper was 
usually served about that time. So dark was my room then 
that objects in it could scarcely be distinguished. About a 
quarter of an hour before the attendant was due to appear 
with my evening meal I made my preparations. That the 
stage setting might be in keeping with the plot, I tore up 
such papers as I had with me, and also destroyed other ar- 
ticles in the room — as one might in a frenzy; and to com- 
plete the illusion of desperation, deliberately broke my watch. 
I then took off my suspenders, and tying one end to the head 
of the bedstead made a noose of the other. This I adjusted 
comfortably about my throat. At the crucial moment I 
placed my pillow on the floor beside the head of the bed 
and sat on it — for this was to be an easy death. I then 



I20 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

bore just enough weight on the improvised noose to give all a 
plausible look. And a last life-like (or rather death-like) 
touch I added by gurgling as in infancy's happy days. 

No schoolboy ever enjoyed a prank more than I enjoyed 
this one. Soon I heard the step of the attendant, bringing my 
supper. When he opened the door he had no idea that any- 
thing unusual was happening within. Coming as he did 
from a well lighted room into one that was dark it took him 
several seconds to grasp the situation — and then he failed 
really to take it in, for he at once supposed me to be in a semi- 
unconscious condition from strangulation. In a state of 
great excitement this brute of the morning called to his 
brute-partner and I was soon released from what was nothing 
more than an amusing position, though they believed it one 
of torture. The vile curses with which they had addressed 
me in the morning were now silenced. They spoke kindly 
and expressed regret that I should have seen fit to resort to 
such an act. Their sympathy was as genuine as such men 
can feel, but a poor kind at best, for it was excited by the 
thought of what might be the consequences to them of their 
own neglect. While this unwonted stress of emotion threat- 
ened the attendants' peace of mind I continued to play my 
part, pretending to be all but unconscious. 

Shortly after thus rescuing me from a very living death, 
the attendants picked me up and carried my limp body and 
laughing soul to an adjoining room, where I was tenderly 
placed upon a bed. I seemed gradually to revive. 

"What did you do it for?" asked one of the attendants. 

"What's the use of living in a place like this, to be abused 
as I've been to-day?" I asked. "You and the doctor ignore 
me and aU my requests. Even a cup of water between meals 
is denied me, and other requests which you have no right 
to refuse. Had I killed myself, both of you would have been 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 1 21 

discharged. And if my relatives and friends had ever found 
out how you had abused and neglected me it is likely you 
would have been arrested and prosecuted." 

Word had already been sent to the assistant physician. 
He hurried to the ward, his almost breathless condition 
showing how my farce had been mistaken for a real tragedy. 
The moment he entered I abandoned the part I had been 
playing. 

"Now that I have you three brutes where I want you I'll 
tell you a few things you don't know," said I. "You prob- 
ably think I've just tried to kill myself. It was simply a 
ruse to make you give me some attention. When I make 
threats and tell you that my one object in life is to live long 
enough to regain my freedom and lay bare the abuses which 
abound in hospitals for the insane you simply laugh at me, 
don't you? But the fact is, that's my ambition, and if you 
knew anything at all you'd know that abuse won't drive me 
to suicide. You can continue to abuse me and deprive me 
of my rights, and keep me in exile from relatives and friends, 
but the time will come when I '11 make you sweat for all this. 
I'll put you in prison where you belong. Or if I fail to do 
that, I can at least bring about your discharge from this in- 
stitution. What's more, I will." 

The doctor and attendants now took my threats with 
characteristic nonchalance. Such threats, often enough 
heard in such places, make Httle or no impression, for 
they are seldom made good. Most of those subjected to 
abuse and neglect never regain their freedom; or, if they 
do, have not an accurate enough memory, or a stout enough 
heart, to support any inclination they may have to proceed 
to action. When I made these threats I really wished to 
put these men in prison. To-day I have no such desire, 
for were they not victims of the same vicious system of 



122 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

treatment to which I was subjected? In every institution 
conducted on the principles of "Restraint" the very atmos- 
phere is brutalizing. Place a bludgeon in the hand of any 
man, with instructions to use it when necessary, and the 
gentler and more humane methods of persuasion are natu- 
rally forgotten or deliberately abandoned. 



Throughout my period of elation, especially the first months 
of it when I was doing the work of several normal men, I 
required an increased amount of fuel to generate the abnor- 
mal energy my activity demanded. I had the characteristic 
voracious appetite, and I now insisted that the attendant give 
me the supper which he was about to serve when he discov- 
ered me in the simulated throes of death. At first he re- 
fused, but finally relented and brought me a cup of tea and 
some buttered bread. Because of the severe choking 
administered earlier in the day it was with difficulty that I 
swallowed any food. I had to eat slowly. The attendant, 
however, ordered me to hurry and threatened otherwise to 
take what little supper I had. I told him that I thought he 
would not — that I was entitled to my supper and intended 
to eat it with as much comfort as possible. This nettled 
him, and by a sudden and unexpected move he managed to 
take from me all but a crust of bread. Even that he tried 
to snatch. I resisted and the third fight of the day was soon 
on, — and that within five minutes of the time the doctor 
had left the ward. At the time I was seated on the bed. 
The attendant, true to his vicious instincts, grasped my 
throat and choked me with the full power of a hand accus- 
tomed to that unmanly work. His partner, in the mean- 
time, had rendered me helpless by holding me flat on my back 
while the attacking party choked me into breathless submis- 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 123 

sion. The first fight of the day was caused by a corn-cob; 
this of the evening by a crust of bread. Insignificant things 
— but eloquent evidence. In each instance an insane man, 
conscious of his rights, was assaulted by two sane but un- 
trained and unfeeling men whose brutal methods were coun- 
tenanced by a sane physician. 

Were I to close the record of events of that October day 
with an account of the assault just described, few, if any, 
would imagine that I had failed to mention all the abuse to 
which I was that day subjected. The fact is that not the 
half has been told. As the handling of me within the twenty- 
four hours typifies the worst, but, nevertheless, the not un- 
usual treatment of all patients in a Hke condition, I feel 
constrained to describe minutely the torture which was my 
portion that night. I would prefer not to deal at such 
length with so distressing a subject, but to yield to that 
preference would not be the way of truth. There are 
abuses to be corrected and they must be laid bare by one 
with personal and painful knowledge of them. Non-com- 
batants may with propriety discuss the buzzing of a mos- 
quito, but the ominous sound of the bullet can best be 
described by a man who has been on the firing-line. 

After that supper-fight I was left alone in my room for 
about an hour. Then the assistant physician, the two at- 
tendants, and a third attendant entered. One of the attend- 
ants carried a canvas contrivance known as a camisole. A 
camisole is a type of strait- jacket; and a very convenient 
type it is for those who resort to such methods of restraint,^ 

* There are several methods of restraint in use, chief among them: 
"mechanical restraint" and so-called "chemical restraint." The former con- 
sists in the use of instruments of restraint, namely, strait- jackets or cami- 
soles, "muffs," straps, "mittens," "restraint" or "strong" sheets, etc., — 



124 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

for it enables them to deny the use of strait-jackets at all. 
A strait- jacket, indeed, is not a camisole, just as electrocu- 
tion is not hanging. 

When I planned my ruse of the afternoon I knew perfectly 
^ well that I should soon find myself in a strait- jacket. The 
^> thought rather took my fancy, for I was resolved to know 
-~ the inner workings of the violent ward ; and as my purpose in 
) life was eventually to bring about reform, I bore the more 
/ wilhngly, sometimes even cheerfully, much of the abuse to 
which I was subjected. But the fact that my transgressions 
of rules were frequently dehberate in no way excuses those 
in authority. For in no other respect did my acts — un- 
questionably those of an insane man — differ from those of 
other patients, — except, perhaps, that I was able to avoid 
their repetition and thus escape much of the punishment 
which falls to the lot of those who know not what they do. 
If what I am about to relate arouses sympathy, I trust that 
it will be bestowed upon the irresponsible patients in whose 
behalf I speak — not wasted on one who no longer needs it. 
The piece of glass with which I had that morning written 
the motto already quoted I had appropriated for a purpose. 

all of them instruments of neglect and torture. "Chemical restraint" 
(sometimes, but improperly, dignified by the term "medical restraint") 
consists in the unwise use of temporarily paralyzing drugs, — hyoscine being 
the popular "dose." By the use of such drugs a troublesome patient may 
be rendered unconscious and kept so for hours at a time. Indeed, very 
troublesome patients (especially when attendants are scarce) are not infre- 
quently kept in a stupefied condition for days, or even for weeks, — but only 
in institutions where the welfare of the patients is lightly regarded. In- 
vestigators should remember that the less conspicuous "chemical restraint" 
is oftentimes used as a substitute for the more spectacular and easily 
detected "mechanical restraint," — and, to the untrained observer, shows 
only on the drug bill. By its use any unprincipled management may fool 
the public. Therefore the mere absence of m^echanical instruments of 
restraint cannot be taken as proof that an institution is conducted on Non- 
Restraint principles. 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 125 

Knowing that I should soon be put in the uncomfortable, but 
not necessarily intolerable, embrace of a strait- jacket, my 
thought was that I might during the night, in some way or 
other, use this piece of glass to advantage — perhaps cut 
my way to a hmited freedom. To make sure that I should 
retain possession of it, I placed it in my mouth and held it 
snugly against my cheek. Its presence there did not inter- 
fere with my speech ; nor did it invite visual detection. But 
had I known as much about camisoles and their adjustment 
as I learned later, I should have resorted to no such futile 
expedient. 

A camisole, or, as I prefer to stigmatize it, a strait- jacket, 
is really a tight-fitting coat of heavy canvas, reaching from 
neck to waist, constructed, however, on no ordinary pattern. 
There is not a button on it. The sleeves are closed at the 
ends, and the jacket, having no opening in front, is adjusted 
and tightly laced behind. To the end of each blind sleeve 
is attached a strong cord. The cord on the right sleeve is 
carried to the left of the body, and the cord on the left sleeve 
is carried to the right of the body. Both are then drawn 
tightly behind, thus bringing the arms of the victim into a 
folded position across his chest. These cords are then 
securely tied. 

After many nights of torture, this jacket, at my urgent and 
repeated request, was finally adjusted in such manner that 
had it been so adjusted at first, I need not have suffered any 
torture at all. This I knew at the time, for I had not failed 
to discuss the matter with a patient who on several occasions 
had been restrained in this same jacket. It is the abuse 
rather than the use of such instruments of restraint against 
which I inveigh. Yet it is hardly worth whUe to distinguish 
between "use" and "abuse," for it is a fact that where the 
use of mechanical restraint is permitted, abuse is bound to 



126 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

follow. The very fact that there are institutions — many 
of them at this time — where no such restraint is ever re- 
sorted to, leads me to dwell at length on the experiences of 
this night; for I would, if I could, strike the final blow 
which shall drive these instruments of torture from all hos- 
pitals for the insane. 

Had not the element of personal spite entered into the 
assistant physician's treatment of me on this occasion, I 
should now be pleased to give him the benefit of every doubt. 
But there are no doubts; and for the enlightenment of all 
men of his type — and the public — I shall point out his 
errors. The man's personality was apparently dual. His 
"Jekyll" personality was the one most in evidence, but it 
was the "Hyde" personality that seemed to control his ac- 
tions when a crisis arose. It was "Doctor Jekyll" who 
approached my room that night, accompanied by the attend- 
ants. The moment he entered my room he became "Mr. 
Hyde." He was, indeed, no longer a doctor, or the sem- 
blance of one. His first move was to take the strait- jacket 
in his own hands and order me to stand. Knowing that 
those in authority really believed that I had that day at- 
tempted to kill myself, I found no fault with their wish to 
put me in restraint ; but I did object to having this done by 
Jekyll-Hyde. Though a strait-jacket should always be 
adjusted by the physician in charge, I knew that as a matter 
of fact the disagreeable duty was invariably delegated to 
the attendants. Consequently Jekyll-Hyde's eagerness to 
assume an obligation he usually shirked inspired me with the 
feeling that his motives were spiteful. For that reason I 
preferred to entrust myself to the uncertain mercies of a 
regular attendant; and I said so, but in vain. "If you will 
keep your mouth shut I'll be able to do this job quicker," 
said Jekyll-Hyde. 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 127 

"I'll shut my mouth as soon as you get out of this room 
and not before," said I. Nor did I. My abusive language 
was, of course, interlarded with the inevitable epithets. Yet 
these should not have annoyed the doctor at all, and would 
not, had he judged them fairly. The more I talked the more 
vindictive he became. He said nothing, but, unhappily for 
me, he expressed his pent-up feelings in something more 
effectual than words. After he had laced the jacket, and 
drawn my arms across my chest so snugly that I could not 
move them a fraction of an inch, I asked him to loosen the 
strait-jacket enough to enable me at least to take a full 
breath. I also requested him to give me a chance to dis- 
entangle my fingers which had been caught in an unnatural 
and uncomfortable position. 

"If you will keep still a minute, I will," said Jekyll-Hyde. 
I obeyed, and willingly too, for I did not care to suffer more 
than was necessary. Instead of loosening the strait-jacket 
as agreed, this doctor, now livid with rage, drew the cords, 
in such a way that I found myself more securely and cruelly \^ 
held than before. This breach of faith threw me into a 
frenzy. Though it was because his continued presence 
served to aggravate my condition that Jekyll-Hyde at last 
withdrew, it will be observed that he did not do so until he 
had satisfied an unmanly desire which an apparently lurking 
hatred had engendered. 'The attendants soon withdrew 
and locked me up for the night. 

No one incident of my whole life has ever impressed itself 
more indelibly on my memory. Within one hour's time I ( 
was suffering pain as intense as any I ever endured, and be- 
fore the night had passed that pain had become almost 
unbearable. My right hand was so held that the tip of one 
of my fingers was all but cut by the nail of another, and soon 
knife-like pains began to shoot through my right arm as far 



128 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

as the shoulder. If there be any so curious as to wish to get 
a slight idea of my agony, let him bite a finger tip as hard as 
he can without drawing blood. Let him continue the op- 
eration for two or three minutes. Then let him multiply 
that effect, if he can, by two or three hundred. In my 
case, after four or five hours the excess of pain rendered 
me partially insensible to it. But for nine hundred min- 
utes — fifteen consecutive hours — I remained in that 
strait-jacket; and not until the twelfth hour, about break- 
fast time the next morning, did an attendant so much as 
loosen a cord. 

During the first seven or eight hours, excruciating pains 
racked not only my arms, but most of my body. For the 
first and only time in my life I had hysterics. And, though 
I cried and moaned, in fact, screamed so loudly that the 
attendants must have heard me, little attention was paid to 
me, — probably because of the strict orders from "Mr. 
Hyde," after he had again assumed the r61e of "Doctor 
Jekyll." I even begged the attendants to loosen the jacket 
enough to ease me a little. This they refused to do, and they 
seemed to enjoy being in a position to add their consider- 
able mite to my torture. 

Before midnight I really believed that I should be unable 
to endure the torture and retain my reason. A peculiar 
pricking sensation which I now felt in my brain, a sensation 
exactly like that of June, 1900, led me to believe that I might 
again be thrown out of touch with the world I had so lately 
regained. Realizing the awfulness of that fate I redoubled 
my efforts to effect my rescue. Shortly after midnight I 
did succeed in gaining the attention of the night-watch. 
Upon entering my room he found me flat on the floor. I 
had fallen from the bed and perforce remained absolutely 
helpless where I lay. I could not so much as lift my head. 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 129 

This, however, was not the fault of the strait-jacket. It 
was because I could not control the muscles of my neck 
which that day had been so mauled. I could scarcely swal- 
low the water the night-watch was good enough to give me. 
This night-watch was not a bad sort of fellow; yet even he 
refused to loosen the strait-jacket a fraction of an inch. As 
he seemed sympathetic, I can attribute his refusal to nothing 
but strict orders issued by the assistant physician. 

It will be recalled that I placed a piece of glass in my 
mouth before the strait-jacket was adjusted. At midnight 
the glass was still there. After the refusal of the night- 
watch, I said to him: "Then I want you to go to Doctor 
Jekyll" (I, of course, called him by his right name; but to 
do so now would be to prove myself as brutal as Mr. Hyde 
himself). "Tell him to come here at once and loosen this 
jacket. I can't endure the torture much longer. After 
fighting two years to regain my reason, I believe I'll lose my 
mind again. You have always treated me kindly. For 
God's sake, get the doctor!" 

"I can't leave the main building at this time," said the 
night-watch. (Jekyll-Hyde lived in a house about one- 
eighth of a mile distant, but within the hospital grounds.) 

"Will you then take a message to the assistant physician 
who stays here?" (One of the two assistant physicians 
had apartments in the main building.) 

"I'll do that," he replied. 

"Tell him how I'm suffering. Ask him to please come 
here at once and ease this strait- jacket. If he doesn't I'll 
be as crazy by morning as I ever was. Also tell him I'll 
kill myself unless he comes, and I can do it, too. I have a 
piece of glass in this room and I know just what I'll do 
with it." 

The night-watch was as good as his word. He after- 



I30 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 



wards told me that he had delivered my message. The 
doctor ignored it. He did not come near me that night, 
nor the next day, nor did Jekyll-Hyde appear until his usual 
round of inspection about eleven o'clock the next morning. 

"I understand that you have a piece of glass v^hich you 
threatened to use for a suicidal purpose last night," said he, 
when he appeared. 

"Yes I have, and it's not your fault or the other doctor's 
that I am not now dead. Had I gone mad, in my frenzy I 
might have swallowed that glass." 

"Where is it?" asked the doctor, incredulously. 

As my strait- jacket rendered me armless I presented the 
glass to Jekyll-Hyde on the tip of a tongue which he had 
often heard but never before seen. 



XVI 

Mine was no suicidal intent. Yet, in my hysterical con- 
dition it is wonderful that I did not swallow that glass even 
by accident; and had I happened to become irresponsibly 
insane — as well I might — it is more than probable that 
I should have done so by design. The assistant physician 
who ignored my midnight request may have been influenced 
by ethical reasons — perhaps by a wish not to interfere with 
Doctor JekyU's case. If so, ethics of that sort — or the 
so-called etiquette of the profession — had best be done 
away with in asylums. And, though I am sure that this-' 
physician harbored no feeling of ill-wiU toward me, he 
is, nevertheless, deser\dng of censure because of his almost 
criminal neglect of a patient who, he well knew, had previously 
been possessed of suicidal impulses. Indeed, he did not 
surely know whether my apparent attempt at suicide that 
evening had been real or simply a ruse. But the general 
belief was that I had meant to kiU myself. The least this 
doctor could have done was to take the trouble to investi- 
gate, judge my condition, and deprive me of the piece of 
glass I claimed to have — or convince himself that I did not 
have it. 

Such errors of judgment are, I believe, common. They 
are due sometimes to sheer laziness, but probably more often 
to the fact that so many insane patients cry *'Wolfl" But 
annoyance is no excuse for negligence. If doctors are not 
willing to do their whole duty and protect aU patients at aU 
hours they should either resign or be summarily discharged. 

131 



132 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

It is to be regretted that so many members of the medical 
profession seek and accept positions in hospitals for the in- 
sane, not because of any genuine interest in the work to be 
done, but simply as a sort of makeshift which will enable 
them to support themselves until they can engage in the 
general practice of medicine, or of a certain congenial branch 
of it. It is these veritable leeches who generally treat pa- 
tients with the least consideration. They become medical 
policemen who make their rounds in a perfunctory way and 
resort to the club or its equivalent upon slight provocation. 
Though there are without doubt many competent physicians, 
fine men, who really have taken up their work among the 
insane without any intention of making it their life-work, 
these men have immediately appreciated the opportunity 
for the life of noble unselfishness which lies before them, 
and, grasping that opportunity, have wrought excellent re- 
sults — considering the inadequate equipment with which, in 
most instances, they have been compelled to work. What 
surprises me is that so many thoroughly efficient physicians 
have been willing to work year in and year out for salaries 
which are not so large, by one half, as the income most of 
them could surely enjoy in general practice. No class of 
men in the world are more deserving of generous treatment 
than the competent and considerate men now working among 
the insane. As for the incompetent, may their incompetence 
be so conspicuous as to effect their prompt discharge! 



After fifteen interminable hours the strait-jacket was re- 
moved. Whereas just prior to its putting on I had been in 
a vigorous enough condition to offer stout resistance when 
assaulted, now, on coming out of it, I was helpless. When 
my arms were released from their restricted position the pain 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 133 

was intense. Each and every joint had been racked. I had 
no control over the fingers of either hand, and could not have 
dressed myself had I been promised my freedom for doing so. 
And this, bear in mind, was the effect of a camisole, which 
form of restraint hospital officials, when called upon to'^ 
testify, so often describe as being harmless and not very un- i 
comfortable. -^ 

For more than the following week I suffered as already 
described, though of course with gradually decreasing 
intensity as my racked body became accustomed to the 
unnatural positions it was forced to take. This first experi- 
ence occurred on the night of October i8th, 1902. I was 
subjected to the like unfair and unnecessary ordeal each 
and every night on the following dates : October 19th, 20th, 
2ist, 22d, 23d, 24th, 25th, 26th, 27th, 28th, 29th, 30th, and 
31st, as well as the nights of November ist, 2d, 3d, 4th, 
5th, 6th, and 7th, — twenty-one nights in all, and parts of 
each of the corresponding twenty-one days. On more than 
one occasion, indeed, the attendant placed me in the strait- 
jacket during the day for refusing to obey some sHght wish. 
This, too, without an explicit order from the doctor in 
charge, though perhaps he acted under a general order.* 

During most of this restraint I was in the padded cell. A 
padded cell is a vile hole. The side walls are padded as high 
as a man can reach, as is also the inside of the door. The 
worst feature of such cells is the lack of ventilation, which 
deficiency of course aggravates the general unsanitary con- 
dition. The cell which I was compelled to occupy was prac- 
tically without heat. As a result I suffered intensely from 

1 In some States the law requires that a record of the use of mechanical 
restraint and seclusion be kept by hospital ofi&cials, and that such record 
shall be open to public inspection. This law is a move in the right direc- 
tion. Restraint hates Pubhcity. 



134 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 



the cold. Frequently it was so cold I could see my breath. 
And, though my canvas jacket served to protect part of that 
body which it was at the same time racking, I was seldom 
comfortably warm. For, once uncovered, my arms being 
pinioned, I had no way of re-arranging the tangled blankets. 
What little sleep I managed to get I took lying on a filthy 
and hard mattress placed on the bare floor. 

Lack of ventilation means vitiated and foul air, and viti- 
ated and foul air was the last thing one in my conditionTsiiouid' 
have been permitted to breathe. I was entitled to an ade- 
quate supply of oxygen, for, being two or three times as 
active as any normal person, I was burning up a propor- 
tionately greater amount of tissue. Strangely enough I 
was able to hold my own while thus subjected to a 
process of slow poisoning; but I am confident that many 
a patient, possessed of less stamina, has been seriously 
affected, if not permanently injured, by confinement in such 
unsanitary dens. To describe the condition of a padded cell 
at its worst would violate good taste. As it is likely to be in 
an unmentionable condition for hours at a time the serious- 
ness of the situation may be appreciated. The condition of 
my mattress was such that I objected to its use; and nothing 
so justifies my objection as the fact that it was actually and 
immediately heeded. It seems to be the prevailing opinion 
that "anything is good enough for a crazy man." In my 
opinion, if the sane suggestions and requests of insane pa- 
tients were complied with, as my suggestion was on this 
occasion, hospitals for the insane would become model insti- 
tutions sooner than they will if the needed changes continue 
to depend upon indifferent persons in authority. 

It is to be regretted that many hospitals for the insane 
maintain such cells — either padded or unpadded. Like 
strait-jackets they can be used to advantage only on the 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 135 

rarest occasions. Therefore they should be abolished. They 
have abready been abolished by those doctors who are 
advocates of Non-Restraint — except in a few instances 
where the authorities have not yet given these intelligent 
superintendents money enough to provide the added atten- 
tion and equipment necessary to care properly for a patient 
during a period of intense excitement.^ 

The man who was superintendent while I was undergoing 
treatment at this hospital had, during his early incumbency, 
gained considerable distinction by advocating Non-Restraint. 
But, during the latter years of his life, for some reason 
unknown to me, he permitted Restraint to be used — in 
moderation. Nevertheless, "moderation" means "abuse," as 
my account surely proves. I attribute this doctor's appar- 
ent change of attitude to his advanced age, which made it 
physically impossible for him to give that attention to the 
individual case which a proper enforcement of Non-Restraint 
requires. In saying this, however, I do not wish to seem un- 
grateful to a man, now dead, who did much for me and would 
have done more had he at the time known of the conduct 
of his assistant physician. 

The present superintendent of this hospital, a man in the 
prime of life and a firm believer in Non- Restraint, is placing 
the institution on a Non-Restraint basis. The vile padded 
cell, already described, no longer exists, and only once or 
twice during the past year has a patient been placed in a 
strait-jacket, and then only by the direct order and in the 
presence of the superintendent himself. Why use a strait- 
jacket at all ? Simply because methods of treatment in an 

1 In a hospital provided with modem bathing facilities mechanical re- 
straint and "seclusion" need never be resorted to; for modem equipment 
includes the so-called "continuous bath," in which an excited patient may 
be placed and kept for hours, until his excitability gives way to a fairly 
normal calm. As a rule, patients enjoy the "continuous bath." 



136 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

institution in which mechanical restraint has been used 
cannot immediately be changed. Not that the doctors ad- 
vocating Non-Restraint need time to adjust themselves to 
the new conditions, but the attendants require both time 
and training; and changes also (though not great ones) in 
the equipment of the building are necessary. The principle 
of Non-Restraint is something which has to be absorbed. 
It is an atmosphere of kindliness. It is not unliEeThe' 
esprit de corps of the army — a certain standard to be 
attained and maintained. When attendants once appreciate 
the significance and advantages of it they invariably take 
great pride in proving that they have the faculty for con- 
trolling patients without resorting to any other force than that 
of kindliness — one of the greatest and least used of all forces. 



For this period of three weeks — from October 18th until 
November 8th, 1902, when I left this institution and was 
transferred to a state hospital for the insane — I was con- 
tinuously either under lock and key (in the padded cell or 
some other room) or under the eye of an attendant. Over 
half the time I was in the snug but cruel embrace of a 
strait-jacket — about three hundred hours in all. While 
being subjected to this terrific abuse I was held in an exile 
as complete as that of a Siberian convict. I was cut off 
from all direct and all honest indirect communication with 
my legally appointed conservator, and also with all relatives 
and friends. I was even cut off from satisfactory com- 
munication with the superintendent, who was a real friend 
and one who would not have permitted me to suffer so had 
he known the truth. To be sure, he knew that I was 
being subjected to restraint, but he supposed it was such 
as he himself would have administered under like circum- 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 



137 



stances, restraint which, though unpleasant, need not have 
amounted to torture. Being in exile and deprived more 
completely of my rights than a justly condemned murderer 
who had all but forfeited his life, I saw the superintendent 
but twice, and then for so short a time that I was unable 
to give him any convincing idea of my plight. These inter- 
views occurred on two Sundays that fell within my period of 
exile, for it was on Sunday that the superintendent usually 
made his weekly round of inspection. What chance had I 
of successfully advocating my cause while my pulpit was a 
padded cell, and the congregation — with the exception of 
the superintendent — the very attaches who had been abus- 
ing me? At such times my pent-up indignation poured 
itself forth in such a disconnected way that my protests were" 
robbed of their right ring of truth. For all that, I was not 
then, or at any time, incoherent in speech. I was simply 
voluble and digressive — a natural incident of elation. Such 
notes as I managed to write on scraps of paper were inva- 
riably confiscated by the assistant physician. At all events, 
it was not imtil some months later that the superintendent 
was informed of my treatment, when, at my request, no less 
a person than the Governor of the State discussed the sub- 
ject with him. How I brought about that discussion while 
still virtually a prisoner will be narrated in due time. And 
not until several days after I had left this institution and had 
been placed in another, when for the first time in six weeks I 
saw my conservator, did he learn of the treatment to which I 
had been subjected. From his office in New Haven he had 
on several occasions called up the assistant physician and 
inquired about my condition. Though the doctor did tell 
him that I was highly excited and difficult to control he did 
not even hint that I was being subjected to any unusual re- 
straint. Dr. Jekyll deceived every one, and — as things 



138 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

have turned out — deceived himself; for, had he realized 
/then that I should one day be able to do what I am now 
doing, his brutal instincts would surely have been checked 
by his cowardly ones. 

How helpless, how at the mercy of his keepers, a man who 
enters an asylum may be, is further illustrated by the conduct 
of this same doctor. Once, during the third week of my 
experience in a strait-jacket, I refused to take certain med- 
icine which the attendant offered me. For some time I had 
been regularly taking this innocuous concoction without pro- 
test; but I now decided that as the attendant refused most 
of my requests I should no longer comply with all of his. He 
did not argue the point with me. He simply reported my 
refusal to Doctor Jekyll, A few minutes later Doctor Jekyll 
— or rather Mr. Hyde — accompanied by three attendants, 
entered the padded cell. I was robed for the night — in a 
strait-jacket. Mr. Hyde held in his hand a rubber tube. 
An attendant stood near with the medicine. For over two 
years, threats had been made that the "tube" would be re- 
sorted to if I refused medicine or food. I had begun to 
look upon it as a myth; but its presence in the hands of an 
oppressor now convinced me of its reality. I saw that the 
doctor and his bravos meant business; and, as I had already 
endured torture enough, I determined to make every conces- 
sion this time and escape what seemed to be in store for me. 

"What are you going to do with that?" I asked, fixing 
my eye on the tube. 

"The attendant says you refuse to take your medicine. 
We are going to make you take it." 

"I'll take your old medicine," was my reply. 

"You have had your chance," said Mr. Hyde. 

"All right," I said. "Put that medicine into me any way 
you think best. But the time will come when you'll wish 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 139 

you hadn't. When that time does come it won't be easy to 
prove that you had the right to force a patient to take 
medicine he had offered to take. I know something about 
the ethics of your profession. You have no right to do 
anything to a patient except what's good for him. You 
know that. All you are trying to do is to punish me, and I 
give you fair warning I'm going to camp on your trail tiU 
you are not only discharged from this institution, but ex- 
pelled from the State Medical Society as well. You are a 
disgrace to your profession, and that society will attend to 
your case fast enough when certain members of it, who are 
friends of mine, hear about this. Furthermore, I shall re- 
port your conduct to the Governor of the State. He can 
take some action even if this is not a state institution. Now, 
damn you, do your worst!" 

Coming from an insane man this was rather straight talk. 
The doctor was noticeably disconcerted. Had he not feared 
to lose caste with the attendants who stood by I think he^ 
would have given me another chance. But he had too much 
pride and too little manhood to recede from a false position 
once taken. I no longer resisted, even verbally, for I no 
longer wanted the doctor to desist. Though I did not an- 
ticipate the operation with pleasure, I was eager to take 
the man's measure. He and the attendants knew that I 
usually kept a trick or two even up the sleeve of a strait- 
jacket, so they took added precautions. I was fiat on my 
back, with simply a mattress between me and the floor. One 
attendant held me. Another stood by with the medicine 
and with a funnel through which, as soon as Mr. Hyde 
should insert the tube, the dose was to be poured. The 
third attendant stood near as a reserve force. Though the 
insertion of the tube, when skilfully done, need not cause suf- 
fering, the operation as conducted by Mr. Hyde was painful. 



I40 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 



"Try as he would he was unable to insert the tube properly, 
though in no way did I attempt to balk him. His embar- 
rassment seemed to rob his hand of whatever cunning it 
may have possessed. After what seemed ten minutes of 
bungling, though it was probably not quite five, he gave up 
the attempt, but not until my nose had begun to bleed. 
He was plainly chagrined when he and his bravos retired. 
Intuitively I felt that they would soon return. That they 
did, armed with a new implement of war. This time the 
doctor inserted between my teeth a large wooden peg — to 
keep open a mouth which he usually wished closed. He 
then forced down my throat a rubber tube. Then the at- 
tendant adjusted the funnel, and the medicine, or rather 
liquid — for its medicinal properties were without effect 
upon me — was poured in. 

This medicine was supposed to be soporific in effect. If 
I was so greatly in need of sleep, was an hour of intense 
mental excitement and physical torture likely to induce it? 
The spite of this man who thus tried to discipline me was 
evident. Though I am confident that few doctors in charge 
of the insane act as unprofessionally and unfairly as he did, 
there are, I believe, men of his type to be found in every 
State in the Union. And they will continue to prey upon 
the insane until Non-Restraint becomes the watchword of 
all. 



XVII 

As the scant reports sent to my conservator during these 
three weeks indicated that I was not improving as he had 
hoped, he made a special trip to the institution to investigate 
in person. On his arrival he was met by none other than 
Doctor Jekyll, who told him that I was in a highly excited 
condition, which, he intimated, would be aggravated by a 
personal interview. Now for a man to see his brother in 
my plight would be a distressing ordeal, and, though my 
conservator came within two hundred feet of my prison cell, 
it naturally took but a suggestion to dissuade him from 
coming nearer. Doctor Jekyll did tell him that it had been 
found necessary to place me in "restraint" and "seclusion" 
(the professional euphemisms for "strait-jacket," "padded 
cell," etc.), but no hint was given that I had been roughly 
handled. Doctor Jekyll's politic dissuasion was no doubt 
inspired by the knowledge that if ever I got within speaking 
distance of my conservator nothing could prevent my 
giving him a circumstantial account of my sufferings — 
which account would have been corroborated by the black- 
ened eye I happened to have at the time. Indeed, in dealing 
with my conservator, the assistant physician showed a degree 
of tact which, had it been directed toward myself, would 
have sufficed to keep me tolerably comfortable. 

My conservator, though temporarily stayed, was not con- 
vinced. He felt that I was not improving where I was, and 
he wisely decided that the best course would be to have me 
transferred to a pubhc institution — the State Hospital. A 

141 



142 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

few days later the judge who had originally committed me 
ordered my transfer. Nothing was said to me about the 
proposed change until the moment of departure, and then 
I could scarcely believe my ears. In fact I did not believe 
my informers; for three weeks of abuse, together with my 
continued inability to get in touch with my conservator, had 
so shaken my reason that there was a partial recurrence of 
old delusions. I imagined myself on the way to the State 
Prison, a few miles distant; and not until the train had 
passed the prison station did I believe that I was really on 
my way to the State Hospital for the Insane.^ 

1 The managements of institutions where the insane are received and 
treated should, without further delay, adopt the sensible system of nomen- 
clature now in use in several States in the Union. For instance, in New 
York, the "State Hospitals for the Insane" are designated as follows: 
Hudson River State Hospital, Willard State Hospital, Manhattan State 
Hospital, etc. The word "insane" does not appear in the name or on the 
stationery of an institution, where it is so likely to offend sensitive inmates 
and their relatives. The phrase "State Hospital," vdth appropriate words 
preceding, — preferably a word or words suggesting its location, — is all the 
designation needed. A general adoption of this suggestion vsdll render 
obsolete the already archaic but still used names: "Lunatic Asylum," 
" Insane Asylum," "Insane Hospital" and "Hospital for the Insane." In 
this book the latter name is repeatedly used, — not from choice, however, 
but because it is the one in general use at present. The main point is that 
people should learn to avoid the unnecessary use of words weighted with 
misconceptions of the past. 



XVIII 

The State Hospital for the Insane in which I now found 
myself, though in many respects above the average of such 
institutions, is typical. It commands a wide view of a beauti- 
ful river and valley. This view I was permitted to enjoy — 
at first. Those in charge of the institution which I had just 
left did not give my new custodians any detailed account of 
my case. Their reticence was, I believe, occasioned by 
chagrin rather than charity. Tamers of wild men have as 
much pride as tamers of wild animals (but unfortunately 
less skill) and to admit defeat is a thing not to be thought 
of. Though private institutions are prone to shift their 
troublesome cases to state institutions, there is a deplorable 
lack of sympathy and co-operation between them, which in 
this instance, however, proved fortunate for me. 

From October i8th until the early afternoon of November 
8th, at the private institution, I had been classed as a raving 
maniac. The name I had brought upon myself by experi- 
mental conduct; the condition had been aggravated and 
perpetuated by the stupidity of those in authority over me. 
And it was the same experimental conduct on my part, and 
stupidity on the part of my new custodians, which gave 
rise, two weeks later, to a similar situation. On Friday, 
November 7th, I was in a strait- jacket. On November 9th 
and loth I was apparently as tractable as any of the twenty- 
three hundred patients in the State Hospital — convention- 
ally clothed, mild mannered, and, seemingly, right minded. 
On the 9th, the day after my arrival, I attended a church 

143 



144 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 



service held at the hospital. My behavior was not other 
than that of the most pious worshiper in the land. The 
next evening, with most exemplary deportment, I attended 
one of the dances which are held every fortnight during the 
winter. Had I been a raving maniac such activities would 
have led to a disturbance; for maniacs, of necessity, disre- 
gard the conventions of both pious and polite society. Yet, 
on either of these days, had I been in the private institution, 
I should have occupied a cell and worn a strait-jacket. 

The assistant superintendent, who received me upon my 
arrival, judged me by my behavior. He assigned me to one 
of two connecting wards — the best in the hospital — where 
about seventy patients led a fairly agreeable life. Though 
no ofhcial account of my case had accompanied my transfer, 
the attendant who had acted as escort and guard had already 
given an attendant at the State Hospital a brief account of 
my recent experiences. Yet when this report finally reached 
the ears of those in authority they wisely decided not to trans- 
fer me to another ward so long as I caused no trouble where 
I was. Finding myself at last among friends I lost no time 
in asking for writing and drawing materials, which had 
so rudely been taken from me three weeks earlier. My re- 
quest was promptly granted. The doctors and attendants 
treated me kindly and I again began to enjoy life. My de- 
sire to write and draw had not abated. However, I did not 
devote my entire time to those pursuits, for there were plenty 
of congenial companions about. I found pleasure in talk- 
ing — more pleasure by far than others did in listening. In 
fact I talked incessantly, and soon made known, in a general 
way, my scheme for reforming asylums, not only in the 
State, but, of course, throughout the world, for my delu- 
sional perspective made the earth look small. The attend- 
ants had to bear the brunt of my loquacity, and they soon 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 145 

grew weary. One of them, wishing to induce silence, ven- 
tured to remark that I was so crazy I could not possibly 
keep my mouth shut for even one minute. His challenge 
aroused my fighting spirit. 

''I'll show you that I can stop talking for a whole day," 
said I. He laughed, knowing that of all difficult tasks this 
which I had imposed upon myself was, for one in my con- 
dition, least likely of accomplishment. But I was as good 
as my boast. Until the same hour the next day I refused to 
speak to any one. I did not even reply to civil questions; 
and, though my silence was deliberate and good-natured, 
the assistant physician seemed to consider it of a contuma- 
cious variety, for he threatened to transfer me to a less 
desirable ward imless I should again begin to talk. 

That day of self-imposed silence was just about the longest 
I have ever lived, for I was under a word-pressure sufficient 
to have filled a book. Any alienist will admit that my per- 
formance was remarkable, and he will further agree that it 
was, at least, an indication of a high degree of self-control. 
Though I have no desire to prove that at this period I was not 
in an abnormal condition, I do wish to show that I had a 
degree of self-control that probably would have enabled me 
to remain in the best ward at this institution had I not been 
intent — insanely intent, of course, and yet with a high de- 
gree of deliberation — upon a reformatory investigation. 
The crest of my wave of elation had been reached early in 
October. It was now (November) that the curve represent- 
ing my return to normality should have been continuous 
and diminishing. Instead, it was kept violently fluctuating 
— or at least its fluctuations were aggravated — by the im- 
positions of those in charge of me, induced sometimes, I 
freely admit, by deliberate and purposeful transgressions of 
my own. My condition during my first three weeks of exile 



146 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

had been, if anything, one of milder excitement than that 
which had previously obtained during the first seven vi'-eeks 
of my period of elation. And my condition during the two 
weeks I now remained in the best ward in the State Hospital 
was not different from my condition during the preceding 
three weeks of torture, or the succeeding three weeks of abuse 
and privation — except in so far as a difference was occa- 
sioned by the torture and privation itself. 

Though I had all along intended to effect reforms in ex- 
isting methods of treatment, my intense and reckless desire 
to investigate "violent wards" did not possess me until I 
myself had experienced the torture of continued confine- 
ment in such a ward. It was simple to deduce that if one 
could suffer as I had while a patient in a private institution, 
brutality must exist in a state hospital. So it was that I en- 
tered the State Hospital with a firm resolve to inspect per- 
sonally every type of ward, good and bad. But I was in no 
hurry to begin. My recent experience had exhausted me, 
and I wished to regain strength before subjecting myself to 
another such ordeal. This desire to recuperate controlled my 
conduct for a while, but its influence gradually diminished as 
life became more and more monotonous. I soon found the 
good ward entirely too polite. I craved excitement — action. 
And I determined to get it regardless of consequences; 
though I am free to confess I should not have had the courage 
to execute my plan had I known what was in store for me. 

About this time my conservator called to see me. Of 
course I told him all about my cruel experiences at the 
private institution. My account surprised and distressed 
him. I also told him that I knew for a fact that similar 
conditions existed at the State Hospital, as I had heard con- 
vincing rumors to that effect. He urged me to behave my- 
self and remain in the ward where I was, which ward, as I 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 147 

admitted, was all that one could desire — provided one had 
schooled himself to desire that sort of thing. During our 
talk I told my conservator that I wished to spend Thanks- 
giving Day at home. He said that that was out of the ques- 
tion, as I was in too excited a condition. His objection was 
absolutely fair, but I could not at that time see the jus- 
tice of it. With intense feeling and the forcefulness of 
right words I informed him that nothing should prevent 
my going to New Haven the following week. 

The fact that I was under lock and key and behind what 
were virtually prison bars in no way gave me a sense of help- 
lessness. I firmly believed that I should find it easy to 
effect my escape and reach home for the Thanksgiving Day 
celebration. And, furthermore, I knew that, should I reach 
home, I should not be denied my portion of the good things 
to eat before being returned to the hospital. (After a famine, 
love of food is hkely to be as strong as love of home.) Being 
under the spell of an intense desire to investigate the "vio- 
lent ward," I concluded that the time for action had come. 
I reasoned, too, that it would be easier and safer to escape 
from that ward — which was on a level with the ground — 
than from a ward three stories above it. The next thing I 
did was to inform the attendants and several of the patients 
that within a day or two I should do something to cause my 
removal thither. They of course did not believe that I had 
any idea of deliberately inviting such a transfer, for the 
violent ward to an inmate of a hospital for the insane is 
what a prison is to a sane and free man. My very frank- 
ness disarmed the attendants. 

On the evening of November 21st I went from room to 
room collecting all sorts of odds and ends belonging to other 
patients. These I secreted in my room. I also collected 
a small library of books, magazines, and newspapers. After 



148 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

securing all the booty I dared, I mingled with the other 
patients until the time came for going to bed. The attend- 
ants soon locked me in my junk shop and I spent the rest 
of the night setting it in disorder. My original plan had been 
to barricade the door during the night, and thus hold the 
doctors and attendants at bay until those in authority had 
accepted my ultimatum, which was to include a Thanksgiv- 
ing visit at home. But before morning I had slightly al- 
tered my plan. My sleepless night of activity had made me 
ravenously hungry, and I decided that it would be wiser not 
only to fill my stomach but to lay by other supplies of food 
before submitting to a siege. Accordingly I set things to 
rights and went about my business the next morning as 
usual. At breakfast I ate enough for two men, and put in 
my pockets bread enough to last for twenty-four hours at 
least. Then I returned to my room and at once barricaded 
the door. My barricade consisted of a wardrobe, several 
drawers which I had removed from the bureau, and a num- 
ber of books, — among them " Paradise Lost " and the 
Bible, which books I placed in position, with conscious 
satisfaction, as a key-stone. Thus the space between the 
door and the opposite wall of the room was completely filled. 
My room-mate, a young fellow in the speechless condition in 
which I had been during my period of depression, was in 
the room with me. This was accidental. It was no part of 
my plan to hold him as a hostage, though I might finally have 
used him as a pawn in the negotiations had my barricade 
resisted the impending attack longer than it did. It is a 
cormnon trick for insane patients to barricade their doors, 
and such situations when they arise are rightly regarded as 
serious. The conduct of the patient who has thus isolated 
himself is, to those in authority, entirely a matter of con- 
jecture. Though certain types of patients may safely be left 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 



149 



in their elected seclusion, one as excited as I was on this 
occasion, of course, had to be brought to bay. It was not 
long before the attendants realized that something was 
wrong. They came to my door and asked me to open it, I 
refused, and told them that to argue the point would be a 
waste of time. They tried to force an entrance. Failing in 
that, they reported to the assistant physician. At first he 
parleyed with me. I good-naturedly, but emphatically, told 
him that I could not be talked out of the position I had 
taken; nor could I be taken out of it until I was ready to 
surrender, for my barricade was one that would surely hold. 
I also announced that I had carefully planned my line of 
action and knew what I was about. I complimented him on 
his hitherto tactful treatment of me, and grandiloquently — 
yet sincerely — I thanked him for his many courtesies. I 
also expressed entire satisfaction with the past conduct of 
the attendants. In fact, on that part of the institution in 
which I was then confined I put the stamp of my capricious 
approval. "But," said I, "I know that there are wards in 
this hospital where helpless patients are brutally treated; 
and I intend to put a stop to these abuses at once. Not 
until the Governor of the State, the judge who committed 
me, and my conservator come to this door will I open it. 
When they arrive we '11 see whether or not patients are to be 
robbed of their rights and abused." 

My speech was made through a screen transom over the 
door. In print it has a highly sane and connected appear- 
ance; but my course of action was rightly construed as 
symptomatic of elation; and the doctor acted wisely in re- 
fusing to be reassured. For a few minutes he continued 
his persuasive methods. That he should even imagine that 
I would basely recede from my high and mighty position, 
only irritated me the more. 



I50 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

"You can stand outside that door all day if you choose," 
I said. "I won't open it until the three men I have named 
appear. I have prepared for a siege; and I have enough 
food in this room to keep me going for a day anyway." 

My ultimatum was in fact couched in more vituperative 
terms and naturally nettled the doctor. Besides, he was, no 
doubt, apprehensive for my room-mate, fearing perhaps that 
I might make his life the price of a refusal to summon the 
State authorities at my bidding. Realizing at last that no 
argument would move me, he set about forcing an entrance. 
First he tried to remove the transom by striking it with a 
stout stick. I gave blow for blow and the transom remained 
in place. To this day it shows the marks of the conflict. A 
carpenter was then sent for, but before he could go about his 
work one of the attendants managed to open the door enough 
to thrust in his arm and shove aside my barricade. I did 
not realize what was being done until it was too late to inter- 
fere. The door once open, in rushed the doctor and four 
attendants. Without ceremony I was thrown upon the bed, 
with two or tliree of the attacking force on top of me. Again 
I was choked, this time by the assistant physician. Though 
I am of the opinion that such action on his part was totally 
uncalled for, especially so because of its demoralizing effect 
upon the attendants present, I wish to credit him with a de- 
gree of skill which enabled him to accomplish his purpose 
without any serious bruising of my throat. The operation 
was a matter of only a moment. But before it was over I 
had the good fortune to deal the doctor a stinging blow on 
the jaw, for which (as he was about my own age and the 
odds were five to one) I have never felt called upon to 
apologize. 

Once I was subdued each of the four attendants attached 
himself to a leg or an arm and, under the direction of the doc- 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 151 

tor, I was carried bodily through two corridors, down two 
flights of stairs, and to the "violent ward." My dramatic 
exit startled my fellow patients, for so much action in so 
short a time is seldom seen in a quiet ward. And few 
patients placed in the "violent ward" are introduced with so 
impressive an array of camp-followers as I had that day. 

All this to me was a huge joke, with a good purpose be- 
hind it. Though excited I was good-natured and, en route 
to my new quarters, I said to the doctor; "Whether you be- 
lieve it or not, it's a fact that I'm going to reform these in- 
stitutions before I'm done. I raised this rumpus to make 
you transfer me to the violent ward. What I want you to do 
now is to show me the worst you've got." 

"You needn't worry," said the doctor. "You'll get it." 

He spoke the truth. I did "get it." 



XIX 

Ix this countr}' on Decem?jer 31st, 1903, there v»'ere two 
hundred and twenty-six public and one hundred and two 
private hospitals for the insane. The majority of these, ex- 
cept the smallest of the private institutions, must have at 
least two "violent wards" — one for the men, one for the 
women. Some of the larger hospitals have several such 
wards. Therefore, it may safely be assumed that there are, 
all told, about seven hundred v/ards of this character in 
which not fev/er than fifteen thousand patients are confined. 
Of these thousands, many live, as it were, near the very 
crater of a volcano of trouble; and many of the other 
patients live on the uncertain slopes of this same volcano 
— within a zone of constant menace. 

Throughout the countr}^, so-called 'Violent wards" differ 
considerably. Of the worst of them, I say "so-called" out 
of deference to the doctors who work among the insane. For 
you will never hear one of them say "\aolent ward." That 
term offends their sensibilities. They refer to such wards 
as "excited wards," "strong wards," "back wards," or 
"disturbed wards." I wish that I might honestly adopt 
their "perfumed phrases," but I cannot. A "\dolent ward" 
is not a place where insane patients violently attack their 
keepers or fellow-patients, except in the rarest of instances, 
and then, as a rule, only after they have been goaded into a 
revengeful madness by unremitting cruelty. In a word, 
a "violent ward" is too often a ward wherein \iolence is 
done to helpless patients by ignorant, untrained, and un- 

152 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 153 

sympathetic attendants. However, in justice to a consider- 
able and increasing number of institutions where patients 
are uniformly treated with consideration, I wish to state 
that in these well managed hospitals no ward is deserving 
of the name "violent ward." But this admission only 
strengthens my contention that it is the character of the 
attendants in charge of the troublesome cases, and not the 
disposition of the patients themselves, which makes a ward 
a "violent ward." 



Even for a "violent ward" my entrance was spectacular 
— if not dramatic. The three attendants regularly in charge 
naturally jumped at the conclusion that, in me, a trouble- 
some patient had been foisted upon them. They noted my 
arrival with an unpleasant curiosit}", which in turn aroused 
my curiosity, for it took but a glance to convince me that my 
burly keepers were typical attendants of the brute-force type. 
Acting on the order of the doctor in charge, one of these at- 
tendants stripped me of my outer garments, and, clad in 
nothing but underclothes, I was thrust into a cell. Few, 
if any, state prisons in this country contain worse holes than 
this cell proved to be. It was one of five, situated in a short 
corridor adjoining the main ward. It was about six feet wide 
by ten feet long and of a good height. A heavily screened 
and barred window admitted light and a negligible quantity 
of air — for the ventilation scarcely deserved the name. The 
walls and floor were bare, and there w^as no furniture. A 
patient confined here must he on the floor with no substitute 
for a bed but one or two felt druggets. Sleeping under such 
conditions becomes tolerable after a time, but not until one 
has become accustomed to King on a surface nearly as hard 
as stone. Here (as well, indeed, as in other parts of the ward) 



154 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

for a period of three weeks I was permitted, yes, forced — 
to breathe and re-breathe air so vitiated that even when I 
occupied a larger room, doctors and attendants seldom 
entered without remarking its quality; — this, too, at a, time 
when the restoration of my physical and mental health es- 
pecially demanded pure air and plenty of it. My first meal 
increased my distaste for my semi-sociological experiment. 
For over a month I was kept in a half-starved condition. At 
each meal, to be sure, I was given the usual portion of 
food served to the other patients, but an average portion 
of such food is not sufficient to repair the prodigal waste of 
brain and bodily tissue which is symptomatic of elation. 

Worst of all, it was winter, and these, my fijrst quarters, 
were without heat. As one's olfactory nerves soon become 
uncommunicative, the breathing of foul air is not a conscious 
hardship. To be famished the greater part of the time, on 
the other hand, is a very conscious hardship. But to be 
half-frozen, day in and day out for a long period, is exqui- 
site torture. Of all the suffering I endured, that occasioned 
by confinement in cold cells seems to have made the most 
lasting impression. Hunger is a local disturbance, but when 
one is cold every nerve in the body registers its call for help. 
Long before reading a certain passage of De Quincey's I had 
decided that cold could cause greater suffering than hunger; 
consequently, it was with great satisfaction that I read the 
following sentences from his "Confessions": "O ancient 
women, daughters of toil and suffering, among all the hard- 
ships and bitter inheritances of flesh that ye are called upon to 
face, not one — not even hunger — seems in my eyes compar- 
able to that of nightly cold. ... A more killing curse there 
does not exist for man or woman than the bitter combat be- 
tween the weariness that prompts sleep and the keen, search- 
ing cold that forces you from that first access of sleep to start 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 155 

up horror-stricken, and to seek warmth vainly in renewed 
exercise, though long since fainting under fatigue." 

The hardness of the bed and the coldness of the room were 
not all that interfered with sleep. The short corridor in 
which I was placed was known as the "Bull Pen" — a 
phrase eschewed by the doctors.^ It is so called, I suppose, 
because it is usually in an uproar — especially during the 
dark hours of the early morning. Patients in a state of 
excitement may sleep during the first hours of the night, but 
seldom all night, and even should one have the capacity to 
do so, his companions in durance would wake him up with a 
shout, or a song, or a curse, or the kicking of a door. A 
noisy and chaotic medley frequently continues without inter- 
ruption for hours at a time. Noise, unearthly noise, is the 
poetic license allowed the occupants of these cells. I spent 
several days and nights in one or another of the cells of the 
"Bull Pen" and I question whether I averaged more than 
two or three hours' sleep a night during that time. Seldom do 
the regular attendants pay any attention to the noise, though 
even they must at times be disturbed by it. In fact the only 
person likely to attempt to stop it is the night-watch, who, 
when he does enter a cell for that purpose, invariably kicks or 
chokes the noisy patient into a state of temporary quiet. I 
noted this and scented trouble. 

Drawing and writing materials having been again taken 
from me, I cast about for some new occupation. As soon 

1 The term "Bull Pen" has many meanings. It is perhaps, more com- 
monly applied to walled-in or fenced-in enclosures where insane patients 
may be herded together, and, at a minimum of effort on the part of those in 
authority, be given deceptive and anything but beneficial tastes of such re- 
stricted liberty as must, of necessity, fall to the lot of the insane. The more 
efBcient superintendents of our hospitals for the insane condemn the use of 
" Bull Pens," and are able to do without them simply by turning the patients 
loose within a given and generous area and placing attendants on guard to 
preserve order and prevent escapes. 



156 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

as I was transferred to a room with a bed, I found an occu- 
pation in the problem of warmth. Though I gave repeated 
expression to the benumbed messages of my tortured nerves, 
the doctor refused to return my clothes. For a semblance 
of warmth I was forced to depend upon ordinary undergar- 
ments and an extraordinary imagination. The heavy felt 
druggets were about as plastic as blotting paper and I de- 
rived little comfort from them until I hit upon the idea of 
rending them into strips. These strips I would weave into a 
crude Rip Van Winkle sort of suit; and so intricate was the 
warp and woof thereof that the attendant had to cut me out 
of it each morning. At first, until I acquired the destruc- 
tive knack, the tearing of one drugget into strips was a task 
of four or five hours. But in time I became so proficient 
that I could completely destroy two, sometimes three, of 
these six-by-eight druggets in a single night. During the 
following weeks of my close confinement I destroyed more 
than twenty of these druggets, each worth about four 
dollars; — and I confess, I found a peculiar satisfaction in 
the destruction of property belonging to a State which had 
deprived me of all my effects — except underclothes. But 
my destructiveness was due to a variety of causes. It was 
occasioned primarily by a "pressure of activity," for which 
the tearing of druggets served as._a-,v^nt. A phrase used by 
me in a letter written during my first month of elation aptly 
describes my condition at this time. Said I, in that letter, 
"I'm as busy as a nest of ants." That my energy should 
direct itself toward the only destructible objects at hand — 
the druggets — was not surprising; nor was it surprising 
that I found a use for the strips, for, as I have already 
proved, an insane person's acts are often purposeful. 
Though the habit of tearing druggets was the outgrowth 
of an «tlTi«sij»l impulse, the habit itself lasted longer than 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 



157 



it could have done had I not, for so long a time, been 
deprived of suitable clothes and been held a prisoner in cold 
cells. But another motive soon asserted itself. Being de- 
prived of all the luxuries of life and most of the necessities, 
my mother-wit, always conspiring with a wild imagination 
for something to occupy my time, led me at last to invade 
the field of invention. With appropriate contrariety an 
unfamiliar and, by me, hitherto almost detested line of in- 
vestigation now attracted me. Abstruse mathematical 
problems which had defied solution for centuries began to 
appear easy. To defy the State and its puny representatives 
had become mere child's play, so I forthwith decided to 
overcome no less a force than gravity itself. 

My conquering imagination soon tricked me into believ- 
ing that I could lift myself by my boot-straps — or rather 
that I should do so when my laboratory should contain foot- 
gear that lent itself to the experiment. But what of the 
strips of felt torn from the druggets? Why, these I used as 
the straps of my missing boots ; and having no boots to stand 
in I used my bed as boots. I reasoned that for my scien- 
tific purpose a man in bed was as favorably situated as 
a man in boots. Therefore, attaching a sufiicient number 
of my felt strips to the head and foot of the bed, and, in 
turn, attaching the free ends to the transom and the 
window-guard, I found the rest very simple. For, next, 
I joined these cloth cables in such manner that by pulling 
downward I effected a re-adjustment of stress and strain, 
and my bed, with me in it, was soon dangling in space. My 
sensations at this momentous instant must have been much 
like those which thrilled Newton when he solved one of 
the riddles of the universe. Indeed, they must have been 
more intense, for Newton, knowing, had his doubts; I, not 
knowing, had no doubts at all. So epoch-making did this 



158 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

discovery appear to me that I noted the exact position of the 
bed so that a wondering posterity might ever afterward 
view and reverence the exact spot on the earth's sur- 
face whence one of man's greatest thoughts had winged its 
way to immortality. 

For weeks I beheved I had uncovered a mechanical prin- 
ciple which would enable man to defy gravity. And I talked 
freely and confidently about it. That is, I proclaimed the 
impending results. The intermediate steps in the solution 
of my problem I ignored — for good reasons. A blind man 
may harness a horse. So long as the horse is harnessed one 
need not know the office of each strap and buckle. Grav- 
ity was harnessed — that was all. At the proper time I 
should reveal my secret in detail. Meanwhile I felt sure 
that another sublime moment of inspiration would intervene 
and clear the atmosphere, thus rendering flight of the body 
as easy as a flight of imagination. 



XX 

While my inventive operations were in progress I was 
chafing under a sense of the injustice of the unsanitary and 
certainly unscientific treatment to which I was being sub- 
jected. In spite of my close confinement in vile cells, for a 
period of over three weeks I was denied a bath. I do 
not regret this deprivation, for the attendants, who at the 
beginning were unfriendly, might have forced me to bathe in 
water which had first served for several other patients. 
Though such an unsanitary and disgusting practice was 
contrary to rules, it was often indulged in by the lazy 
brutes who controlled the ward. Investigation has con- 
vinced me that this evil is widespread. 

I continued to object to the unsatisfactory portions of food 
served me, and perhaps my objections were intensified by an 
approaching Thanksgiving. My projected Thanksgiving 
trip to New Haven had vanished from my mind, and my 
actual experience on that day was in dismal contrast to 
what I had originally planned for myself. My attendant, 
in the unaccustomed guise of a ministering angel, brought 
me the usual turkey and cranberry dinner which, on two of 
the three hundred and sixty-five days of each year, is pro- 
vided by an intermittently generous State. Turkey being 
the rara avis of the imprisoned, it was but natural that I 
should desire to gratify a palate long insulted. I wished not 
only to satisfy my appetite but to impress indelibly a mem- 
ory which for months had not responded to so agreeable a 
stimulus. While lingering over the delights of this experi- 

159 



l6o A MIND THAT FOXJND ITSELF 

ence I forgot all about the ministering angel. But not for 
long. He soon returned. Observing that I had scarcely 
touched my feast he said, "If you don't eat that dinner 
in a hurry I'll take it from you." 

"I don't see what difference it makes to you whether I 
eat it in a hurry or take my time about it," said I. "It's 
the best I've had in many a day, and I have a right to get as 
paiich pleasure out of it as I can." 

1 "We'll see about that," said he, and, snatching it away, he 
y stalked out of the room, leaving me to satisfy my hunger on the 
/ memory of vanished luxuries. Thus did a feast become a fast. 
^ Under this treatment I soon learned to be more noisy 
than my neighbors. I was never without a certain humor 
in contemplating not only my surroundings, but myself; 
and the demonstrations in which I began to indulge were 
partly in fun and partly by way of protest. In these I was 
assisted, and, at times inspired, by a young man in the room 
next mine. He was about my own age and was enjoying 
the same phase of exuberance as myself. Not realizing 
that most of our ward-mates were less mad than we — or 
than we were supposed to be — we talked and sang at all 
hours of the night. At the time we believed that the other 
patients enjoyed the spice which we added to the restricted 
variety of their lives, but later I learned that a majority of 
them looked upon us as mere nuisances. 

We gave the doctors and attendants no rest — at least 
not intentionally. Whenever the assistant physician ap- 
peared we upbraided him for the neglect which was 
then our portion. At one time or another we got ourselves 
banished to the "Bull Pen" for these indiscretions. Had 
there been a viler place of confinement still, our perform- 
ances in the "Bull Pen" undoubtedly would have brought 
us to it. But there was neither justice nor remedial effect 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF i6i 

in such procedure. At last the doctor hit upon the expedient 
of transferring me to a room more remote from my inspir- 
ing, and, I may say, conspiring companion. Talking to 
each other ceased to be the easy pastime it had been; 
so we gradually lapsed into a comparative silence which 
must have proved a boon to our ward-mates. The only 
annoyances to which a number of the patients were now 
subjected during the night were the disturbing noises which 
issued with irregularity, but unfortunate certainty, from the 
"Bull Pen." 

On several occasions I perfected plans to escape, — and not 
only that but also to liberate others. That I did not make 
the attempt was the fault — or merit, perhaps — of a certain 
night-watch, whose timidity, rather than sagacity, impelled 
him to refuse to unlock my door early one morning, although 
I gave him a plausible reason for the request. This night- 
watch, I learned later, admitted that he feared to encounter 
me single-handed. And on this particular occasion well 
might he, for, during the night, I had woven a spider-web 
net, in which I intended to enmesh him. Had I succeeded 
there would have been a lively hour for him in the violent 
ward — had I failed there would have been a Hvely hour 
for me. There were several comparatively sane patients 
(especially my elated neighbor) whose willing assistance I 
could have secured. Then the regular attendants could 
have been held prisoners in their own room, if, indeed, we had 
not in turn overpowered them and transferred them to the 
"Bull Pen" where the several victims of their abuse might 
have given them a deserved dose of their own medicine. 
This scheme of mine was a prank rather than a plot. I had 
an inordinate desire to prove that one could escape if he had 
a mind to do so. Later I boasted to the assistant physician 
of my unsuccessful attempt to escape. 



1 62 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

My punishment for harmless antics of this sort was prompt 
in coming. The attendants seemed to think their whole 
duty to their closely confined charges consisted in delivering 
three meals a day. Between meals he was a rash patient 
who interfered with their leisure. Now one of my greatest 
crosses was the attendants' continued refusal to give me a 
drink when I asked for it. Except at meals, or on those rare 
occasions when I was permitted to go to the wash-room, I 
had to get along as best I might with no water, and that too 
at a time when I was in a fever of excitement. My polite 
requests were ignored; impolite demands were answered 
with threats and curses. And this war of requests, demands, 
threats, and curses continued until the night of the fourth 
day of my banishment. Then the attendants made good 
their threats of assault. That they had been trying to goad 
me into a fighting mood I well knew, and often accused 
them of their mean purpose. They brazenly admitted that 
they were simply waiting for a chance to "slug" me, and 
promised to punish me well as soon as I should give them 
a slight excuse for doing so. 

On the night of November 25th, 1902, the head attendant 
and one of his assistants passed my door. They were re- 
turning from one of the dances which, at intervals during 
the winter, the management provides for the attaches. 
While they were within hearing I asked for a drink of water. 
It was a carefully worded request. But they were in a hurry 
to get to bed, and refused me with curses. Then I replied 
in kind. 

"If I come there I'll kill you," said one of the attendants. 

"Well, you won't get in if I can help it," said I, as I braced 
my iron bedstead against the door. 

My defiance and defences gave the attendants the pre- 
text for which they had been waiting; and my success in 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 163 

keeping them out for two or three minutes only served to 
enrage them. By the time they had gained entrance they 
had become furies. One of the attendants was a young man 
of twenty-seven. Physically he was a perfect specimen of 
manhood ; morally he was deficient, — thanks to the de- 
humanizing eifect of several years in the employ of different 
States of the Union which countenance improper methods 
in the care of their insane wards. It was he who attacked 
me in the dark of my prison room. The head attendant 
stood by, holding a lantern which shed a dim light. 

The door once open, I offered no further resistance. First 
I was knocked down. Then for several minutes I was 
kicked around the room — struck, kneed and choked. My 
assailant even attempted to grind his heel into my cheek. 
In this he failed, for I was there protected by a heavy beard. 
But my shins, elbows, and back were cut by his heavy 
shoes; and had I not instinctively drawn up my knees to my 
elbows for the protection of my body I should have been 
seriously, perhaps fatally, injured. As it was, I was severely 
cut and bruised. When my strength was nearly gone I 
feigned unconsciousness. This ruse alone saved me from 
further punishment, for no premeditated assault is ever 
ended until the patient is mute and helpless. When they 
had accomplished their purpose, they left me huddled in a 
corner to wear out the night as best I might — to live or 

Idie for all they cared. 

' Strange as it may seem I slept well. But not at once. 

• Within five minutes I was busily engaged writing an account 
of the assault. A trained war-correspondent could not have 
pulled himself together in less time. As usual I had re- 
course to my bit of contraband lead pencil — this time a 
pencil which had been smuggled to me the very first day of 
my confinement in the BuU Pen by a sympathetic feUow- 



l64 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

patient. When he had pushed under my cell door that little 
implement of war it had loomed as large in my mind as a 
battering-ram. Paper I had none; but I had previously 
found walls to be a fair substitute. I therefore now selected 
and wrote upon a rectangular spot — about three feet by 
two — which marked the reflection of a light in the 
corridor just without my transom. Among my collection 
of genuine human documents I still have a verbatim copy 
of my midnight inscription. 

The next morning when the assistant physician appeared 
he was accompanied as usual by the guilty head-attendant 
who, on the previous night, had held the lantern during his 
vicious partner's assault. 

"Doctor," said I, "I have something to tell you," — and 
I glanced significantly at the attendant. "Last night I had 
a most imusual experience. I have had many imaginary 
experiences during the past two years and a half, and it may 
be that last night's was not real. Perhaps the whole thing 
was phantasmagoric — like what I used to see during the 
first months of my illness. Whether it was so or not I shall 
leave you to judge. It just happens to be my impression 
that I was brutally assaulted last night. If it was a dream 
it is the first thing of the kind that ever left visible evidence 
on my body." 

With that I uncovered to the doctor a score of bruises and 
lacerations. I knew these would be more impressive than 
any words of mine. The doctor looked wise, but said 
nothing and soon left the room. The guilty attendant tried 
to appear unconcerned, and I really believe he thought me 
not absolutely sure of the events of the previous night, or at 
least unaware of his share in them. 

Though the doctor in his own mind knew that I had been 
abused, he was unable to secure incriminating evidence 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 165 

from the attendants. They of course lied for their mutual 
protection. They were too wise to deny that they had en- 
tered my room, but the reasons they gave for entering and 
their account of what followed were cut from the black cloth 
with which cowards habitually cloak their shame. Of all 
the liars in the world, brute attendants are, to my mind, 
the meanest. They first assault an imprisoned insane man 
when there are no sane eyes or ears to bear witness. Then, 
taking advantage of the suspicion with which the statements 
of the insane are too often regarded, they lie and lie, and 
corroborate their lies according to the code of dishonor which 
obtains among them. A fair idea of this code may be gained 
from one of its rules; namely, that an attendant shall delib- 
erately turn his back when another attendant is assaulting 
a patient. By so doing the attendant is of course able to 
tell the doctor — should he by some rare chance ask — that 
he saw no patient struck by the accused. By telling these 
half-truths, attendants are able to retain their positions 
for months, sometimes years, — but only in institutions where 
"Restraint" is countenanced. 

The two attendants in my case deserved immediate dis- 
charge. They could not offer the excuse of self-defense, for 
they had to unlock the door to get within my reach. In my 
opinion the doctor was at fault both before and after. Surely, 
my wounds should have had more weight with him than the 
palpable lies of those who inflicted them. — 

I soon found that usually a restless or troublesome patient 
placed in the violent ward is assaulted the very first day. This 
procedure seems to be a part of the established code of dis- 
honor. The attendants imagine that the best way to gain 
control of a patient is to cow him from the first. In fact, 
these fellows — nearly all of them ignorant and untrained — 
will tell you that "violent cases" cannot be handled in any 



i66 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

other way. And in so saying they are often sincere. I recall 
the advent of a new attendant, — a young man studying to 
become a physician. At first he seemed inclined to treat 
patients kindly, but he soon fell into brutal ways. His 
change of heart was due partly to the brutalizing envi- 
ronment, but more directly to the attitude of the three 
hardened attendants who mistook his consideration for cow- 
ardice and taunted him for it. Just to prove his metal he 
began to assault patients, and one day knocked me down 
simply for refusing to stop my prattle at his command. I 
did not openly resent his action, for I knew that I should 
only be unmercifully beaten for my temerity. By this time 
I had learned the uselessness of physical resistance. For 
comfort I dwelt upon the thought that I should one day 
deal a death blow to the whole inhuman system which had 
dealt so many death blows to the helpless insane. 

I found also that an unnecessary and continued lack of 
out-door exercise tends to multiply deeds of violence. The 
attendants are supposed to take the patients for a walk 
at least once a day, and twice, when the weather permits. 
Yet the patients in the violent ward (and it is they who most 
need the exercise) usually get out of doors only when the 
attendants see fit to take them. For weeks a ward-mate — 
a man sane enough to enjoy freedom, had he had a home of 
his own — kept a record of the number of our walks. It 
showed that we averaged not more than one or two a week 
for a period of two months. This too in the face of many 
pleasant days which made the close confinement doubly 
irksome. The attendants preferred to remain in the ward, 
playing cards, smoking, and telling their kind of stories. 
One other fact I observed; namely, that as exercise de- 
creased the number of assaults invariably increased. The 
attendants need regular exercise quite as much as the patients 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 167 

and when they fail to employ their energy in this healthful 
way, they are likely to employ it at the expense of the bodUy 
comfort of their helpless charges. It was only because 
of a lax system of supervision that they were able thus to 
shirk their duty. Daily reports as to the exercising of 
patients would correct this common evil. 

If lack of exercise produced a need of discipline, on the 
other hand each disciplinary move served only to inflame 
us the more. Some wild animals can be clubbed into a sem- 
blance of obedience, yet it is a treacherous obedience at best, 
and justly so. And that is the only kind of obedience into 
which a man can be clubbed. To imagine otherwise of a 
human being, sane or insane, is the very essence of insanity 
itself. A temporary leisure may be won for the aggressor, 
but, in the long run, he will be put to greater inconvenience 
than he would be by a more humane method. It was repres- 
sion and wilful frustration which kept me a maniac and 
made maniacs of others. Whenever I was released from lock 
and key and permitted to mingle with the so-called violent pa- 
tients, I was surprised to find that comparatively few were by 
nature troublesome or noisy. So that I am convinced that 
hundreds of patients throughout the country are improperly 
confined in violent wards. This is a serious matter; for, it is 
relatively as unfair to confine the mildly insane among mad- 
men as to immure the sane among the insane. A patient, 
calm in mind and passive in behavior three hundred and sixty 
days in the year, may, on one of the remaining days, commit 
some slight transgression, or, more likely, be goaded into 
one by an attendant — or needlessly led into one by a 
tactless physician. At once he is banished to the violent 
ward, there to remain for weeks — perhaps indefinitely. His 
indiscretion may consist merely in an unmannerly announce- 
ment to the doctor of how lightly the latter is regarded by 



1 68 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

the patient. Such estimates of a doctor's capacity, though 
insane, are frequently correct, and proportionately galling, 
and their truth, the subject of them invariably proves by 
condemning the guilty patient to a term of imprisonment in 
a ward of chaos. A thoroughly competent physician is 
seldom vilified; — for, being competent, he is able to win 
the good-will of his wards, and, should he occasionally be 
consigned to oblivion by an excited patient, he disregards 
the matter, knowing full well that the mouth is but the escape- 
L valve of an abnormally active mind. 



XXI 

The self-control which had enabled me to suspend speech 
for a whole day now stood me in good stead. It enabled 
me to avert much suffering that would have been my portion 
had I been like the majority of my ward-mates. Time and 
again I surrendered when an attendant was about to chas- 
tise me. But at least a score of patients in this ward were 
not so well equipped, and these were viciously assaulted again 
and again by the very men who had so thoroughly initiated 
me into the mysteries of their black art. 

I set myself up as the observer and the reporter of abuses. 
My observations convinced me of an anomaly; namely, that 
the only patients in a hospital for the insane who are not 
likely to be subjected to abuse are the very ones least in need 
of care and treatment. The violent, noisy, and troublesome 
patient is abused because he is violent, noisy, and trouble- 
some. The patient too weak physically or mentally to 
attend to his own wants is frequently abused because of that 
very helplessness which makes it necessary for the attend- 
ants to wait upon him. And so of the forty men in the vio- 
lent ward during my fourteen weeks of confinement there, 
at least twenty were at one time or another viciously beaten 
by some one of the three attendants, frequently by two at once. 

Like fires and railroad disasters, assaults seem to come 
in groups. Sometimes days will pass without a single out- 
break. Then will come a veritable carnival of abuse — 
due invariably to the attendants' state of mind, not to an 
unwonted aggressiveness on the part of the patients. The 

169 



I70 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

beatings which, by reason of my superior discretion, I escaped 
scarcely diminished the sum of punishment. I can recall 
as especially noteworthy ten instances of atrocious abuse. 
Five patients were chronic victims, beaten frequently as I 
was on that night when two attendants broke into my room. 
Three of them, peculiarly irresponsible, suffered with es- 
pecial regularity, scarcely a day passing without bringing 
to them its quota of punishment. One of these, almost an 
idiot, and quite too inarticulate to tell a convincing story 
even under the most favorable conditions, became so cowed 
that, whenever an attendant passed, he would circle his 
oppressor as a whipped cur circles a cruel master. I saw 
him do so time and again. If his avoidance became too 
marked the attendant would then and there chastise him for 
the implied but unconscious insult. 

There was a young man, occupying a cell next to mine in 
the Bull Pen, who was so far out of his mind as to be abso- 
lutely irresponsible. His offense was that he could not 
comprehend and obey. Compared to his abuse, all that I 
suffered in the Bull Pen was as nothing. Day after day I 
could hear the blows and kicks as they fell upon his body, 
and his incoherent cries for mercy were as painful to hear 
as they are impossible to forget. That he survived and to-day 
is dragging out an existence in an asylum, is surprising. It 
is true, I believe, that his form of insanity is considered 
incurable ; but that is an additional consideration in favor of 
kind treatment. 

What wonder that this man who was "violent," or who was 
made violent, would not permit the attendants to dress him ! 
But he had a half-witted friend, a ward-mate, who could 
coax him into his clothes during the time when his oppres- 
sors found him most intractable. STe« an insane man 
can distinguish between friend and foe. ' .i\. 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 17 1 

Of all the patients known to me, one incoherent and irre- 
sponsible man of sixty years I saw assaulted with the great- 
est frequency. This patient was restless and forever 
talking or shouting, as any man might if oppressed by his 
delusions. He was profoundly convinced that a certain 
person had stolen his stomach — an idea inspired perhaps 
by the remarkable corpulency of the person he accused. His 
loss he would wofully voice even while eating. Of course, 
argument to the contrary had no effect; and his monotonous 
recital of his imaginary troubles made him unpopular with 
the attendants. They showed him no mercy. Each day 
— including the hours of the night, when the night-watch 
took a hand — he was belabored with fists, broom-handles, 
and frequently with the heavy bunch of keys which attend- 
ants usually carry on a long chain. He was kicked and 
choked, and his suffering was aggravated by his almost 
continuous confinement in the Bull Pen. An exception to 
the general rule (for such continued abuse often causes 
death) this man lived a long time — five years. 

Another victim, forty-five years of age, was one who had 
formerly been a successful man of affairs. His was a force- 
ful personality, and the traits of his sane days influenced 
his conduct when he became insane. He was in the expan- 
sive phase of paresis, a phase distinguished by an exaggerated 
sense of well-being — for delusions of grandeur are a symp- 
tom of this form as well as of several other forms of insanity. 
Paresis, as everyone knows, is incurable. Its victim is 
doomed — death usually following within three years of 
the onset of the disease. In this instance, instead of 
trying to make the patient's last months on earth comfort- 
able, the attendants subjected him to a course of treatment 
severe enough to have sent even a sound man to an early 
grave. I endured privations and severe abuse for one month 



172 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

at the State Hospital. This man suffered in all ways worse 
treatment for many months — until finally he was trans- 
ferred to a ward where he received kinder treatment. He 
still lives, — another example of man's endurance, 

I became well acquainted with two jovial and witty Irish- 
men. They were common laborers. One was a hod-carrier, 
and a strapping fellow. When he arrived at the institution 
he was suffering with alcoholic delusional insanity — a cur- 
able form. He was at once placed in the violent ward, 
though his "violence" consisted of nothing more than an an- 
noying sort of irresponsibility. He irritated the attendants 
by persistently doing certain trivial things after they had 
been forbidden. For instance, the door to a certain room 
he would open and re-open, undoubtedly in response to "false 
voices" which perhaps commanded him to do so. The at- 
tendants made no allowance for his condition of mind. His 
repetition of a forbidden act was interpreted as deliberate 
disobedience. He was physically powerful, and they deter- 
mined to cow him. Of the master assault by which this was 
sought to be accomplished I was not an eye-witness. But 
I was an ear-witness. It was committed behind a closed 
door; and I heard the dull thuds of the blows, and I heard 
the cries for mercy until there was no breath left the man with 
which he could beg even for his life. For days, that wrecked 
Hercules dragged himself about the ward moaning pitifully. 
He complained of pain in his side and had difficulty in 
breathing, which would seem to indicate that some of his 
ribs had been fractured. This man was often punished, 
frequently for complaining of the torture already inflicted. 
But later, when he began to return to the normal, his good- 
humor and native wit won for him an increasing degree of 
good treatment. 

The other Irishman's arch offense — a symptom of his 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 173 

disease — was that he gabbled incessantly. He could no 
more stop talking than he could right his reason on com- 
mand. Yet his failure to become silent at a word was the 
signal for punishment. On one occasion an attendant or- 
dered him to stop talking and take a seat at the further end 
of the corridor, about forty feet distant. He was doing his 
best to obey, even running to keep ahead of the attendant at 
his heels. As they passed the spot where I was sitting, the 
attendant felled him with a blow behind the ear; and, in 
falhng, the patient's head barely missed the wall. 

Addressing me, the attendant said, "Did you see that?" 

"Yes," I rephed, "and I'll not forget it." 

"Be sure to report it to the doctor," said he — a remark 
which showed his contempt, not only for me but for those in 
authority; and this contempt the latter at least had earned 
by their leniency and indifference. 

The reader will already have observed that the years of the 
patient are no protection. The attendant who had so terribly 
beaten me was particularly flagrant in ignoring the claims 
of age. On more than one occasion he viciously attacked 
a man of over fifty, who, because of his affliction (paresis) 
was virtually a man of seventy. He was a Yankee sailing- 
master, who, in his prime, could have thrashed his assailant 
with ease and thrown him into the sea. But now he was 
helpless and could only submit. However, this man was 
not utterly abandoned by his old world. His wife called 
often to see him; and, because of his condition, she was per- 
mitted to visit him in his room. Once she arrived in the 
nick of time — a few hours after her husband had been 
cruelly beaten. Naturally she asked the attendants how he 
had come by the hurts — the blackened eye and bruised 
head. True to the code, they lied, and declared that the 
patient had fallen out of bed, or stumbled against the wall. 



174 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

The good wife, perhaps herself a Yankee, was not thus to be 
fooled ; and her growing belief that her husband had been as- 
saulted was confirmed by a sight she saw before her visit 
was ended. Another patient — a Frenchman, who was a 
target for abuse — was knocked fiat two or three times as 
he was roughly forced along the corridor by an attendant. 
I saw this little affair and I saw that the good wife saw it. 
The next day she called again and took her husband home. 
And so this distressed woman felt it her duty to assume en- 
tire charge of her mad and really dangerous husband. The 
result was that after a few (probably sleepless) nights, she 
had to return him to the asylum and trust to God rather than 
the State to protect him. 

Still another victim was a man sixty years of age. He 
was quite inoffensive, and no patient in the ward seemed 
to attend more strictly to his own business. Shortly after 
my transfer from the violent ward this old man was wantonly 
attacked by an attendant who broke the patient's arm. 
The attendant (the man who had so viciously assaulted 
me) was summarily discharged. Unfortunately, however, 
the relief afforded the insane was slight and brief, for this 
same brute (as I have since ascertained) soon secured a 
position in an asylum a thousand miles distant, where, no 
doubt, he continues to indulge his base proclivities. 

Death by violence in a violent ward is after all not an un- 
natural death — for a violent ward. The patient of whom 
I am about to speak was also an old man — over sixty. Both 
physically and mentally he was a wreck. On being brought 
to the institution he was at once placed in a cell in the Bull 
Pen, probably because of his previous history for violence 
while delirious at his own home. But his violence (if it 
ever existed) had already spent itself, and had come to be 
nothing more than an utter incapacity to obey. His offense 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 175 

was that he was too weak to attend to his common wants. 
The day after this patient's arrival, shortly before noon, 
he lay stark naked and helpless upon the bed in his cell. 
This I know, for I went to investigate immediately after a 
ward-mate had informed me of the vicious way in which 
the head- attendant had assaulted the sick man. My in- 
formant was a man whose word regarding an incident of 
this character I would take as readily as that of any man I 
know. He came to me, knowing that I had taken upon 
myself the duty of reporting such abominations. My in- 
formant feared to take the initiative, for, like many other 
patients who believe themselves doomed to continued con- 
finement, he feared to invite abuse at the hands of revengeful 
attendants. I therefore promised him that I would report 
the case as soon as I had an opportimity. 

All day long the victim of the attendant's unmanly passion 
lay in his cell in what seemed to be a semi-conscious con- 
dition. I took particular pains to observe his condition, for 
I felt that the assault of the morning might result in death. 
That night, after the doctor's regular tour of inspection, the 
patient in question was transferred to a room next my own. 
The mode of transfer impressed itself upon my memory. 
Two attendants — one of them was he who had so brutally 
beaten the patient — placed the man in a sheet and, each 
taking an end, carried the hammock-like contrivance, with 
its inert contents, to what proved to be its last resting-place 
above ground. Though I cannot say that the patient's 
body slid or struck against the floor as the attendants pro- 
ceeded, the chances are that men who could assault the help- 
less would not be likely to guard against that possibility. 
At least I noted this: the attendants seemed as much con- 
cerned about their burden as one might about a dog in a 
sack, weighted and ready for the river. 



176 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

That night the patient died. Whether he was murdered 
none can ever know. But it is my honest opinion that he 
was. Though he might never have recovered, it is plain 
that he would have lived days, perhaps months. And, had 
he been humanely, nay, scientifically, treated, who can say 
that he might not have been restored to health and home, and 
to-day be enjoying life as is the man who had perhaps 
murdered him. 

According to the hospital records this death was not other 
than a natural death. No autopsy was performed, which 
fact, in itself, shows that the doctors did not suspect that the 
patient had been maltreated; for it is customary to perform 
autopsies when incriminating evidence of abuse is discov- 
ered. But, had there been an autopsy, revealing guilt, — 
what then? In all probability, no arrests would have been 
made, as hospital officials know how difficult it is to secure 
evidence sufficient to convict. Conceding that it is difficult 
to secure such ei-idence, I will not admit that rigorous and 
intelligent action on the part of those in authority would never 
result in the conviction of attendants guilty of assault or 
murder; much less will I admit that the neglect of such ac- 
tion, even if uncertain of success, is ever excusable. Hos- 
pital officials, public prosecutors, and jurors, should bear in 
mind that, at trials for such crimes, the word of a patient, 
sane enough to testify at all, should have greater weight than 
the word of an attendant whose self-interest or cowardice 
will so often cause him to perjure himself. Further, those 
whose duty it is to apprehend and punish criminals should 
remember that there are to be found in every institution 
attendants possessed of a high sense of honor. These will 
not hesitate, under right conditions, to testify against a 
guilty co-worker. 

It is to an attendant of this type that I shall look for con- 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 177 

vincing corroboration. His is the same story as mine, though 
told of a different institution. I resort to it here at the cost 
of digression; for, though I believe my statements alone will 
convince the average reader, surely the corroborating words 
of a man always sane will put my story beyond suspicion, and 
at the same time show that attendants placed under similar 
brutalizing conditions, the country over, will behave similarly. 

While this book was still in draft, I came, by mere chance, 
upon a report which appeared in the Courier- Journal of 
Louisville, Kentucky, of the date, September i8th, 1906. It 
was written by a young lawyer, a resident of Lexington. 
This man, during the early summer of 1906, had worked as 
an attendant in the Eastern Kentucky Asylum for the In- 
sane, at Lexington. He was impelled to enter the hospital 
as an attendant by the belief that a knowledge of insanity 
might prove of value when he should engage in the practice 
of law. He did not enter the employ of the State with the 
thought of effecting reform, for the simple reason, as he 
told me afterwards, that he was totally ignorant of the neces- 
sity for reform. The evil conditions he discovered shocked 
him quite as much as his revelations later shocked an igno- 
rant public. 

There was a homicide connected with this Kentucky affair. 
The victim was a man thirty-seven years of age. Prior to 
his collapse he had held a responsible position in a large 
rolling-mill. Working by day in the exhausting heat of a 
blast-furnace, and at night nursing a sick wife, he finally 
lost his reason. He was at once committed to the State 
Hospital. Had he received the treatment he deserved, prob- 
ably he would have recovered, for his form of insanity was 
curable. But punishment, not treatment, was to be his cruel 
portion. It was administered with such severity that he 
died. This fact was proved at the trial of the guiltiest at- 
13 



178 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

tendant, who, together with another attendant, was convicted 
of manslaughter and sent to State's Prison. Had they killed 
a sane person, I believe they would now be serving Hfe-sen- 
tences, if, indeed, they had not been justly condemned to 
death. 

Another instance of this sort of homicide occurred in 
Vermont. An infirm old man, eighty years of age, was wan- 
tonly attacked and killed by two attendants within a week of 
his commitment. He was a French- Canadian whose under- 
standing of English had been none too good while he was 
sane. When his skill in a foreign tongue had been further 
impaired by a clouded understanding, he was of course 
doubly helpless. Failing to obey the command of an attend- 
ant with that promptness which conduces to personal safety, 
he was attacked and struck with such force that several ribs 
were broken. The shock of it all caused his death. The 
attendants were indicted for manslaughter, and placed under 
bonds of eighteen hundred dollars each. When called to 
trial the more culpable of the two, rather than risk his 
liberty, forfeited his bond and, as this book goes to press, 
has not yet been apprehended. The other attendant ap- 
peared, but, thus far, has not been tried. That men guilty 
of such brutality should be given an opportunity to purchase 
their freedom by forfeiting a small bond is simply another of 
the many injustices legally imposed upon the insane.^ 

The young man who was for a time my neighbor in the 
violent ward, and my companion in mischief, was also 

^ Readers of "Hard Cash" may not be familiar with the public corre- 
spondence into which it drew its author, Charles Reade. His letter of Jan- 
uary 17th, 1870, in the Pa// Mall Gazette, shows how the ribs of insane patients 
could be and were broken by brutal keepers with such fiendish skill as even to 
leave no external evidence on the body of the victim; and that letter shows 
also how prevalent then were atrocities of the kind I have been describing, 
and how easy it was for their perpetrators to escape punishment. 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 179 

terribly abused. This man possessed a distinctive and inter- 
esting personality. To-day, could I enjoy his companion- 
ship, I should rank him high on my list of those whose 
companionship I crave. I am sure I do not exaggerate when 
I say that on ten occasions, within a period of two months, 
this man was cruelly assaulted — and I do not know how 
many times he suffered assaults of less severity. After one 
of these doses of immerited punishment I asked him why he 
persisted in his petty transgressions when he knew that he 
thereby invited such body-racking abuse. 

"Oh," said he, laconically, "I need the exercise." 
To my mind, the man who, with such gracious humor, 
could refer to what was in reality torture, deserved to live 
a century. But an unkind fate decreed that he should die 
young — and by his own hand. Ten months after his com- 
mitment to the State Hospital he was discharged as improved 
— but not cured. This is not an unusual procedure; nor 
was it in his case apparently an unwise one, for the patient 
seemed fit for freedom. During his first month of regained 
liberty, this young man hanged himself. No message of 
excuse did he leave. In my opinion, none was necessary. 
For aught any man knows, the memories of the abuse, tor- 
ture, and injustice, which were so long his portion, may have 
proved to be the last straw which overbalanced the desire to 
live. The doctors will say, and truthfully, that it was a sui- 
cidal impulse which drove him to his death. But can they 
surely deny that that suicidal impulse might never have 
gained control had he been committed to an institution where 
not only he, but all other patients would have been treated 
kindly and scientifically ? Surely, if thousands who contem- 
plate suicide stop short of it because of some little circum- 
stance, saved by a narrow margin, is it not equally true that 
an adverse circumstance may drive a desperate person over 
the final brink to his death ? 



l8o A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

I know of two other instances of young men of about my 
own age who committed suicide shortly after release from 
their places of confinement. These two had been inmates 
of the large private hospital where I had suffered in the strait- 
jacket. So far as I know neither of them was subjected to 
abuse while there. But one of them who was confined in the 
violent ward must have seen patients abused. The other, 
who I think would have recovered had he been skilfully tided 
over his despondent period, was not at any time confined in 
a violent ward. But, if he did not see others roughly han- 
dled, of course he heard the ever-present rumors of abuse. 
Such rumors are common topics of conversation in all 
asylums, and they undoubtedly have a depressing effect 
upon those who need little to convince them that life is not 
worth living. When a patient is discharged and enters 
his old world, is it surprising that sometimes he should 
choose death rather than take the chance of again enter- 
ing a place which to him is worse than the grave itseM ? 

If I were to recount each instance of cruelty (major and 
petty) which I can recall, my chapter on abuse would soon 
become a book of itself. And, if it were possible to put in 
book form the stories of the lives of persons who have suffered 
experiences such as mine, I firmly believe it would take sev- 
eral thousand feet of shelving in a Congressional Library to 
hold this record of Man's inhumanity to Man. Fortunately 
no such collection of woe ever can be gathered. Read the 
few stories of this nature that exist, magnify the impression 
gained, and an approximation may be reached. Without 
question, during the past century hundreds of insane men 
and women have been murdered by their keepers. And 
many of these murders were as deliberate as any ever com- 
mitted, for attendants frequently hate unto death certain 
of their troublesome charges. 



XXII 

The so-called "seclusion" vouchsafed to me I have de- 
scribed. If it is true that I stood in need of seclusion at all, 
I should have had a bed in a room designed especially for 
the treatment of such a case as mine. That room should 
have been perfectly ventilated, and competent nurses should 
have been in practically constant attendance. My every 
reasonable wish (and unreasonable whim, if harmless) 
should have been granted. I should have had nourishing 
food at proper intervals ; and I should have received nothing 
but that kindly treatment which can do more toward the 
restoration of mental health than all the medicine in the 
world. 

Patients are weighed at stated intervals. Shortly after 
entering the State Hospital I weighed about one hundred 
thirty pounds, and that must have been about my weight when 
transferred to the "violent ward." Ten days later, at the 
regular monthly weighing, I weighed only one hundred fif- 
teen pounds. Though loss of weight is a symptom of ela- 
tion, I cannot but believe that my rapid decrease was due 
mainly to deprivation and abuse. 

Before my banishment to the violent ward, the doctor in 
charge of my case had granted me many favors; but during 
the first ten days of my "seclusion" my sense of gratitude 
was dulled by the indignities and the terrific punishment 
to which I was subjected. Is it strange, then, that I had 
no respect for authority personified by a man who, hold- 
ing me in the vilest of exiles, apparently countenanced the 

i8i 



1 82 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

brutal practices of men dependent upon him for their con- 
tinued employment? I refused to be a martyr. Rebellion 
was my watchword. The only difference between the 
doctor's opinion of me and mine of him was that he could 
refuse utterance to his thoughts. Yes — there was another 
difference. Mine could be expressed only in words — 
his in grim acts. 

I repeatedly made demands for those privileges to which 
I knew I was entitled. When he saw fit to grant them 
I gave him perfunctory thanks. When he refused — as he 
usually did — I at once poured upon his head the vials 
of my wrath. Patients with less stamina than I had in- 
variably submit with meekness; and none so aroused my 
sympathy as those whose submission was due to the con- 
sciousness that they had no relatives or friends to support 
them in a fight for their rights. These, disheartened, usually 
bear their burdens with a fortitude which under other con- 
ditions would be sublime. 

On behalf of these, with my usual piece of smuggled lead 
pencil, I soon began to indite and submit to the officers of 
the institution letters in which I described the cruel prac- 
tices which came under my notice. My reports were per- 
functorily accepted and at once forgotten or ignored. Yet 
these letters, so far as they related to overt acts witnessed, 
were lucid and should have been convincing. Furthermore, 
my allegations were frequently corroborated by marks on the 
bodies of the patients. My usual custom was to write an 
account of each assault and hand it to the doctor in authority. 
Frequently I would submit these reports to the attendants 
with instructions first to read and then deliver them to the 
superintendent or the assistant physician. The men whose 
cruelty I thus laid bare read my complaints with evident but 
perverted pleasure. They would laugh and joke about my 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 183 

ineffectual attempts to bring about their discharge. And 
their derision seemed justified; for my almost daily reports 
were without effect. 

My very independence and my impulse to defend others 
gave promise of approaching sanity. Yet it was because of 
this disturbing audacity that I so long failed of a transfer 
to a better ward. One day I would be on the friendliest 
terms with the doctor, the next day I would upbraid him 
for some denial of my rights, — or, as frequently happened, 
for not interposing in behalf of the rights of others. It was 
after one of these wrangles that I was placed in a cold 
cell in the Bull Pen at eleven o'clock one morning. StiU 
without shoes and with no more covering than underclothes, 
I was forced to stand, sit, or lie upon a bare floor as hard 
and cold as the pavement outside. Not until sundown was 
I provided even with a drugget, and this did little good, for 
already I had become thoroughly chilled. In consequence, 
I contracted a severe cold which added greatly to my discom- 
fort, and might have led to serious results had I been of less 
sturdy fiber. 

This day was the thirteenth of December and the twenty- 
second of my exile. I remember it distinctly for it was the 
seventy-seventh birthday of my father, to whom I wished 
to write a congratulatory letter. This had been my custom 
for years when absent from home on that anniversary. And 
well do I remember when, and under what conditions, I 
asked the doctor for permission. It was night. I was flat on 
my drugget-bed. My cell was lighted only by the feeble rays 
of a lantern held by an attendant to the doctor on this his 
regular visit. At first I couched my request in polite lan- 
guage. The doctor merely refused to grant it. I then put 
forth my plea in a way calculated to arouse sympathy. He 
remained unmoved. I then pointed out that he was defying 



1 84 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

the law of the State which provided that a patient should 
have stationery — a statute, the spirit of which at least 
meant that he should be permitted to communicate with his 
conservator.^ But my arguments were of no avail. The 
doctor had set himself up as despot, and despot he remained. 
It was now three weeks since I had been permitted to write 
or send a letter to any relative or friend. Why? Because 
I would persist in telling the truth about my treatment and 
condition. Naturally the management did not desire such 
information to be spread. Contrary to my custom, there- 
fore, I made my final demand in the form of a concession. 
I promised that I would write only a conventional note of 
congratulation, making no mention whatever of my plight. 
It was a fair offer; but to accept it would have been an im- 
plied admission that there was something to conceal, and for 
this, if for no other reason, it was refused. 

Such treatment was not only unfair, it was unsound 
from a scientific point of view. I was fighting for my life 
and my reason; and the doctor apparently was putting 
other obstacles in my way than those which were unavoid- 
able. Surely I was actuated by a sane impulse — the desire 
to write to my father on his birthday. And, as sanity itself 
simply consists in sane impulses, was it not the duty of that 
doctor, rather than to stifle such impulses as they appeared, 
to sustain and strengthen them, and, if possible, encourage 
them to become preponderant? Instead, day after day, I 
was repressed in a manner which probably would have driven 

1 See General Statutes of Connecticut § 2764. Patient may communi- 
cate WITH FRIENDS IN WRITING. All persons detained as insane shall 
at all times be furnished with materials for communicating under seal 
with any proper person without the asylum, and such communications 
shall be stamped and mailed daily. Should the patient desire it, all 
rational communications shall be written at his dictation and duly mailed 
to any relative or person named by the patient. 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 185 

many a sane man into a state of madness and violence. Yet 
that doctor, forgetful or ignorant of the fact that my behavior 
was the direct result of the indignities which he and his under- 
lings were continually heaping upon me, would frequently 
exhort me to play the gentleman. Are mild manners and 
sweet submission usually the product of such treatment? 
Deprived of my clothes, of sufficient food, of warmth, of all 
sane companionship, of my liberty and even of those residu- 
ary rights which belong to a madman, I told the doctors that 
so long as they should continue to treat me as the vilest of 
criminals, I should do my best to complete the illusion. 

The burden of proving my sanity was placed upon me. I 
was told that so soon as I became polite and meek and lowly 
I should find myself in possession of my clothes and of cer- 
tain privileges. In every instance I must earn my reward 
before being entrusted with it. If this principle had been 
applied in a rational way, if, for instance, instead of demand- 
ing of me all the negative virtues in the catalogue of spineless 
saints, the doctor had given me my clothes on the condition 
that they would be taken from me again if I so much as re- 
moved a button, — such a course would have been produc- 
tive of good results. Thus I might have had my clothes 
three weeks earlier than I did, and so been spared much suf- 
fering from the cold. 

I clamored daily for a lead pencil; but for seven weeks 
no doctor, attendant, or other attache gave me one. Now a 
lead pencil represents the margin of happiness for hundreds of 
the insane, while a plug of tobacco represents the margin of 
happiness for thousands of others. To be sure, by reason 
of my somewhat exceptional persistence and ingenuity, I 
managed to be always in possession of some substitute for 
a pencil, surreptitiously obtained, — a fact which no doubt 
had something to do with the doctor's indifference to my 



l86 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

request. But my inability to secure a pencil in a legitimate 
way was a needless source of annoyance to me, and many 
of my verbal indiscretions were directly inspired by the 
doctor's continued refusal to give me what I well knew 
belonged to me by right. Hospital officials will often 
justify such a petty deprivation because of an alleged 
proneness on the part of the patients to scribble on the 
walls. But only in exceptional cases does this mischievous 
tendency exist. During my confinement I saw little such 
vandalism, and most of that was caused by a dearth of paper 
on which to write; and I have since found that in hospitals 
where privileges of this sort are freely and promptly granted, 
there is a disposition on the part of patients to show their 
appreciation by respecting the wishes of their benefactors. 
A doctor who has gained the good-will of a patient can, by 
speaking kindly to him, deter him from worse transgressions 
than scribbling on the walls. But let us admit that a few 
patients will transgress. Must the many suffer because of 
the irresponsibility of the few? And what real harm is 
done by the few? Surely the instinct to so mark a bare 
surface is bom of sanity itself. Why else do under- 
graduates sally forth every now and then with a pot of 
paint — to earn a fleeting immortality among barbarians 
of their own ilk? Inasmuch as Nature herself is everlast- 
ingly carving the earth's surface, it is not strange that man, 
sane and insane, attempts in his feeble way to imitate her. 
It was an assistant physician, other than the one regularly 
in charge of my case, who at last relented and presented me 
with a good lead pencil. By so doing he placed himself 
high on my list of benefactors ; for that stick of wood — 
magnified by my lively appreciation — became as the very 
axis of the earth. 



XXIII 

It was a few days before Christmas that my most galling 
deprivation was at last removed. That is, my clothes were 
restored. These I treated with great respect. Not so much 
as a thread did I destroy. Clothes have a sobering and civil- 
izing effect, and from the very moment I was again provided 
with presentable outer garments my conduct rapidly im- 
proved. One of the doctors with whom I had been on such 
variable terms of friendship and enmity even took me for a 
sleigh-ride. With this improvement came other privileges 
or, rather, the granting of my rights. Late in December I 
was permitted to write and send letters to my conservator. 
Now that I was no longer being treated cruelly the doctor 
in charge was willing that I should communicate directly 
with my brother. Though some of my blood-curdling 
letters were confiscated, a few, detailing my experiences, were 
forwarded. The account of my sufferings naturally dis- 
tressed my conservator, but, as he said when he next 
visited me: "What could I have done to help you? If the 
men in this State whose business it is to care for the insane 
cannot manage you, I am at a loss to know what to do." 
True, he could have done little or nothing, for he did not 
then know the ins and outs of the baffling game into which 
the ties of blood had drawn him. 

About the middle of January the doctor in charge of my 
case went for a two week's vacation. During his absence 
another member of the staff took charge of the violent ward. 
A man of wider experience and more liberal ideas than his 

187 



1 88 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

predecessor, he at once granted me several real privileges. 
One day he permitted me to pay a brief visit to the best ward 
— the ward from which I had been transferred two months 

\ earlier. I thus was able again to mingle with fairly sane 
jmen, and though I enjoyed this privilege upon but one 

/ occasion, and then only for a few hours, the knowledge 

I that I could have such privileges for the asking was a 

\ source of intense satisfaction. 

Altogether the last six weeks of the fourteen during which 
I was confined in the violent ward were comfortable and rel- 
atively happy. I was no longer subjected to physical abuse, 
though this exemption was largely due to my own skill in 
avoiding trouble. I was no longer cold and hungry. I was 
allowed a fair amount of out- door exercise which, after my 
close confinement, proved to be a delightful sort of shock. 
But, above all, I was again given an adequate supply of 
writing and drawing materials, which became as tinder under 
the focused rays of my artistic eagerness. My mechanical 
investigations were gradually set aside and art and literature 
again held sway. Except when out of doors taking my 
apportioned exercise, I remained in my room reading, writing 
or drawing. This room of mine soon became a Mecca for 
the most irrepressible and loquacious characters in the ward. 
These self- elected companions at first interfered with my 
work. But I soon schooled myself to shut my ears to their 
incoherent prattle. Occasionally, some uninvited visitor 
would become obstreperous — perhaps because of my lordly 
order that he leave the room. At such times, however, I 
tested my theory that insane patients in anger can be con- 
trolled by tact. The result was that I invariably induced 
them to obey. Often did they threaten to throttle me; but 
I ignored the threats, and they were never carried out. Nor 
was I afraid that they would be. Had I been a typical 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 189 

attendant, I should have accepted them as challenges, with 
the usual brutal consequences. 

The drawings I produced at this time were crude. For 
the most part they consisted of copies of illustrations which 
I had cut from magazines that had miraculously found their 
way into the violent ward. The heads of men and women 
interested me most, for I had decided to take up por- 
traiture. At first I was content to draw in black and 
white, but I soon procured some colors and from that time 
on I devoted my attention to mastering pastel. With it I 
evolved a method which produced an unusual but not an 
unpleasing effect. I doubt if a graduate of a recognized 
School of Art would dare to discover the secret of my 
method. Therefore I shall give up the key to my mystery so 
that he who runs may take or leave it. On paper with a 
rough surface (such as draughtsmen commonly use) first 
draw an outline, using a hard pencil. Then rub in pastel 
of the desired color. With the tip of the finger this 
can be properly distributed; and the slight indentations 
on the surface of the paper, caused by the hard pencil, 
will immediately appear as light lines. These lines pro- 
duce a peculiar and striking effect. Though this method 
would be of no value in many drawings, in a drawing 
in which there is a wealth of hair to be represented it 
is very serviceable. With my compliments, this method 
(so far as I know, my own) I bequeath to posterity, and 
to such living artists as dare to risk their reputation by 
adopting it. 

In the world of letters I had made little progress. My 
compositions were for the most part epistles — addressed to 
relatives and friends, and to those in authority at the hospital. 
Frequently the letters addressed to the doctors were sent 
in sets of three — this to save time, for I was very busy. The 



190 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 



first letter of such a series would contain my request, couched 
in friendly and polite terms. To this I would add a post- 
script, worded about as follows: "If, after reading this letter, 
you feel inclined to refuse my request, please read letter num- 
ber two." Letter number two would be severely formal — 
a business-like repetition of the request made in letter num- 
ber one. Again a postscript would advise the reader to 
consult letter number three, if the reading of number two 
had failed to move him. Letter nimiber three was invariably 
a brief philippic in which I would consign the unacconmio- 
dating doctor to oblivion. 

In this way I expended part of my prodigious supply of 
feeling. But I had also another way of reducing my crea- 
tive pressure. Occasionally, from sheer excess of emotion, 
I would burst into verse — of a quality not to be doubted. 
Of that quality the reader shall judge, for I am going to 
quote a "creation" written under circumstances which, to 
say the least, were adverse. Before writing these lines I 
had never attempted verse in my life — barring intentionally 
inane doggerel. And, as I now judge these lines, it is prob- 
ably true that even yet I have never written a poem. Never- 
theless, my involuntary, almost automatic outburst is at 
least suggestive of the fervor that was in me. These four- 
teen lines were written within thirty minutes of the time I 
first conceived the idea; and I present them substantially 
as they first took form. From a psychological standpoint, 
at least, they are not without interest. 

LIGHT 

Man's darkest hour is the hour before he's bom, 

Another is the hour just before the Dawn; 

From Darkness unto Life and Light he leaps, 

To Life but once, — to Light as oft as God wills he should. 

'Tis God's own secret, why 

Some live long, and others early die; 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 191 

For Life depends on Light, and Light on God, 
Who hath given to Man the perfect knowledge 
That Grim Despair and Sorrow end in Light 
And Life everlasting, in realms 
Where darkest Darkness becomes Light; 
But not the Light Man knows, 
Which only is Light 
Because God told Man so. 

These verses, which breathe religion, were written in an 
atmosphere where rehgion was almost extinct. With the 
cm-ses of madmen ringing in my ears, some subconscious 
part of me forced me to write at its dictation. I was far 
from being in a pious frame of mind myself, and the quality 
of my thought surprised me then — as it does now. Per- 
haps for a moment some ancestor (I have two who went 
as missionaries to the Sandwich Islands early in the last cen- 
tury) controlled my thoughts. At any rate I like to think 
so, for I should object to being held entirely responsible for 
a poem the technical imperfections of which are scarcely 
atoned for by the elevation of the theme. 



Though I respected my clothes, I did not at once cease to 
tear such material as would serve me in my scientific inves- 
tigations. Gravity being conquered, it was inevitable that 
I should devote some of my time to the invention of a flying- 
machine. This was soon perfected — in my mind; and all 
I needed, that I might test the device, was my liberty. As 
usual I was unable to explain how I should produce the re- 
sult which I so confidently foretold. But I was secure in 
the belief that I should, ere long, fly to St. Louis and claim 
and receive the one hundred thousand dollar reward offered 
by the Commission of the Louisiana Purchase Exposition for 
the most efficient airship there to be exhibited. The mo- 



192 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

ment that thought winged its way through my mind, I had 
not only a flying-machine, but a fortune in the bank. Being 
where I could not dissipate my riches I became a lavish verbal 
spender. I was in a mood to buy anything, and I whiled 
away many an hour planning what I should do with my 
fortune. The St. Louis prize was a paltry trifle. I reasoned 
(if my magnificent mental processes may be dignified as 
reasoning) that the man who could harness gravity had at 
his beck and call the world and all that therein is. This 
sudden accession of wealth made my vast humanitarian 
projects seem only the more feasible. What could be more 
delightful, thought I, than the furnishing and financing of 
ideas of a magnitude such as would stagger humanity. My 
condition was one of ecstatic suspense. Give me my liberty 
and I would show a sleepy old world what could be done to 
improve conditions, not only among the insane, but along 
every line of beneficent endeavor. 

The city of my birth was to be made a garden-spot. All 
defiling, smoke-begriming factories were to be banished to 
an innocuous distance. Churches were to give way to cathe- 
drals; the city itself was to become a paradise of mansions. 
Yale University was to be transformed into the most mag- 
nificent — yet efficient — seat of learning in the world. For 
once, college professors were to be paid adequate salaries, 
and alluring provision for their declining years was to be 
made. New Haven should become a very hot-bed of cul- 
ture. Art galleries, libraries, museums, and theaters of a 
dream-like splendor were to rise whenever and wherever I 
should will. Why absurd? Was it not I who would 
defray the cost? The famous buildings of the Old World 
were to be reproduced, if, indeed, the originals could not be 
purchased, brought to this country, and re-erected. Not 
far from New Haven there is a sandy plain, once the bed 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 193 

of the Connecticut River, but now a kind of miniature 
desert. I often smile as I pass it on the train; for it was 
here, for the edification of those who might never be able to 
visit the Valley of the Nile, that I planned to erect a pyramid 
that should out- Cheops the original. My harnessed grav- 
ity, I believed, would not only enable me to overcome 
existing mechanical difficulties, but it would make the 
quarrying of immense monoliths as easy as the slicing 
of bread. 

After aU, delusions of grandeur are the most entertaining 
of toys. The assortment which my imagination provided 
was a comprehensive one. I had tossed aside the blocks 
of childhood days. Instead of laboriously piling small 
squares of wood one upon another, in an endeavor to 
build the tiny semblance of a house, I now, in this second 
childhood of mine, projected against thin air phantom 
edifices, planned and completed in the twinkling of an eye. 
To be sure such houses of cards almost immediately su- 
perseded each other, but the vanishing of one could not 
disturb a mind which had ever another interesting 
bauble to take its place. And therein lies part of the secret 
of the happiness peculiar to that stage of elation which is 
distinguished by delusions of grandeur, — always provided 
the afflicted one be not subjected to privation and abuse. 
The sane man who can prove that he is rich in material 
wealth is not nearly so happy as his unfortunate brother 
whose delusions trick him into believing himself a modern 
Croesus. A wealth of Midas-like delusions is no burden. 
Such a fortune, though a misfortune in itself, bathes the 
world in a golden glow. No clouds obscure the vision. 
Optimism reigns supreme. "Failure" and "impossible" are 
as words from an unknown tongue. And the unique satis- 
faction about a fortune of this fugitive type is that its loss 
14 



194 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

occasions no regret. One by one the phantom ships of treas- 
ure sail away for parts unknown; untU when the last 
has become but a speck on the mental horizon, the observer 
makes the happy discovery that his pirate fleet has left 
behind it a priceless wake of Reason! 



XXIV 

Early in March, 1903, having lived in a "violent 
ward" for nearly four months, I was transferred to another 
— a ward quite as orderly as the best in the institution, 
though less attractively furnished. Here also I had a room 
to myself: in this instance, however, the room had not only 
a bed, but a chair and a wardrobe. With this elaborate 
equipment I was soon able to convert my room into a ver- 
itable studio. Whereas in the violent ward it had been 
necessary for me to hide my writing and drawing materials 
to prevent their loss, in my new abode I was able to conduct 
my literary and artistic operations without the annoyances 
which had been inevitable during the preceding months. 

Soon after my transfer to this ward I was permitted to go 
out of doors and walk to the business section of the city — two 
miles distant. But on these walks I was always accom- 
panied by an attendant. To one who has never surrendered 
any part of his liberty such surveillance would no doubt seem 
irksome; yet, to me, after being so closely confined, the 
ever-present attendant seemed a companion rather than a 
guard. These excursions into the sane and free world were 
not only a great pleasure, they were almost a tonic. To 
rub elbows with normal men tends to restore the mental 
poise of one whose recovery is imminent. The casual passer- 
by, as a rule, does not distinguish patient from attendant, 
if, indeed, the identity of either is suspected. And the 
knowledge of this fact gives the patient a feeling of security 
which hastens a return of that self-confidence so essential 

195 



196 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

to the success of one about to re-enter a world from which 
he has long been cut off. 

It is to be regretted that those in authority at a state hos- 
pital are unable to send many patients on such little excur- 
sions as I have just mentioned. I know that the doctors would 
be glad to grant such privileges more freely if a sufficient 
number of attendants were available for the purpose. Few 
institutions are provided with an adequate force of attend- 
ants. Yet the States could well afford to employ men 
and women for no other purpose than that of acting as 
escort and guard for those patients whose recovery is only a 
question of time. Such treatment would surely shorten 
the period of convalescence, and the earher discharge of the 
patient would offset the increased cost of treatment; for 
"it is an accepted postulate by speciahsts who have 
examined the question that every recovery from mental 
disease, no matter what the cost of obtaining it, is a saving 
to the State." ^ In every community, I believe, there are men 
and women who would be glad of the opportunity to perform 
such service — for a few hours each day. One of these per- 
sons could be called in whenever a regular attendant could 
not be spared for the purpose. Especially would this scheme 
prove feasible in those institutions (and there are many 
such) situated near a college or university. The students 
would thus be able to make appreciable additions to their 
income during their term of study and, far above the 
financial gains, they would develop a richness of char- 
acter which must come to him who helps to lift a burden 
from the sorely afflicted. 

My first trips to the city were made primarily for the pur- 
pose of supplying myself with writing and drawing materials. 

*See Dr. J. Montgomery Mosher's Fourth Annual Report of Pavilion 
F, Department for Mental Diseases at Albany Hospital (Albany, N. Y.). 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 197 

While enjoying these welcome tastes of liberty, on more than 
one occasion I surreptitiously mailed certain letters which 
I did not dare entrust to the doctor. Under ordinary cir- 
cumstances such an act on the part of one enjoying a special 
privilege would be dishonorable. But the circumstances 
that then obtained were not ordinary. I was simply pro- 
tecting myself against what I believed to be unjust and 
illegal confiscation of letters. 

I therefore need not dilate on the reasons which made 
it necessary for me to smuggle, as it were, to the Governor 
of the State of which I was a ward, a letter of complaint and 
instruction. This letter was written shortly after my trans- 
fer from the violent ward. The abuses of that ward were 
still fresh in my mind, and the memory of distressing 
scenes was kept vivid by reports reaching me from friends 
who were still confined there. These private detectives of 
mine I talked with at the evening entertainments, or at 
church. From them I learned that brutality had become 
more common, if anything, since I had left the ward. Real- 
izing that my crusade against the physical abuse of patients 
thus far had proved of no effect, I determined to go over 
the heads of the doctors and appeal to the ex-officio head 
of the institution, the Governor of the State. 

On March 12 th, 1903, I wrote a letter which so 
disturbed the Governor that he immediately set about an 
informal investigation of some of my charges. Despite its 
prolixity, its unconventional form and what, under other cir- 
cumstances, would be stigmatized as almost diabolic impu- 
dence and familiarity, my letter, as he said months later 
when I conferred with him, "rang true." The writing of it 
was an easy matter; in fact, so easy, because of the pressure 
of truth under which I was laboring at the time, that it em- 
bodied a compelling spontaneity. 



198 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

The mailing of it was not so easy. I knew that the only 
sure way of getting my thoughts before the Governor was 
to do my own mailing. Naturally no doctor could be trusted 
to send an indictment against himself and his colleagues to 
the one man in the State who had the power to institute such 
an investigation as might make it necessary for all to seek 
employment elsewhere. In my frame of mind, to wish to 
mail my letter was to know how to accomplish the wish. 
The letter was in reality a booklet. I had thoughtfully used 
waterproof India drawing ink in writing it, in order, per- 
haps, that a remote posterity might not be deprived of the 
document. The booklet consisted of thirty-two, eight-by- 
ten-inch pages of heavy white drawing paper. These I had 
bound together by sewing. In planning the form of my 
letter I had forgotten to consider the slot of a letter-box of 
average size. Therefore I had to hit upon some peculiar 
method of getting my letter into the custody of the gov- 
ernment. My expedient was simple. There was in the 
town a certain bookstore where I traded. At my request 
the doctor gave me permission to go to that store for supplies. 
I was of course accompanied by an attendant, who little 
suspected what was under my vest. To conceal and carry 
my letter in that place had been easy; but to get rid of it 
after reaching the bookstore was another matter. Watch- 
ing my opportunity, I slipped the missive between the 
leaves of a copy of the Saturday Evening Post. This I did, 
believing that some purchaser would soon discover the letter 
and mail it. In fact, so fearful was I of detection, that, to 
guard against its discovery before I should be safely away 
from the shop, I placed it nearer the bottom than the top 
of the pile. 

That the letter which I thus successfully started on its 
errand finally reached the Governor was not surprising. On 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 199 

the back of the wrapper I had endorsed the following 
words : 

"Mr. Postmaster: This package is unsealed. Neverthe- 
less it is first-class matter. Everything I write is necessa- 
rily first class. I have affixed two two-cent stamps. If extra 
postage is needed you will do the Governor a favor if you 
will put the extra postage on. Or affix "due" stamps, and 
let the Governor pay his own bills, as he can well afford to. 
If you want to know who I am, just ask his Excellency, and 
oblige, Yours truly, 

?" 

Flanking this notice, I had arrayed other forceful senti- 
ments, as follows — taken from statutes which I had framed 
for the occasion: 

"Any person finding letter or package — duly stamped 
and addressed — must mail same as said letter or package 
is really in hands of the Government the moment the stamp 
is affixed." 

And again, 

"Failure to comply with Federal Statute which forbids 
any one except addressee to open a letter — renders one 
liable to imprisonment in State Prison," 

One of the owners of the store in which I left this letter 
found and mailed it. From him, I afterwards learned that 
my unique instructions had piqued his curiosity, as well as 
compelled my wished-for action. Assuming that the reader's 
curiosity may likewise have been piqued, I shall quote cer- 
tain passages from this four thousand word epistle of pro- 
test. The opening sentence read as follows : " If you have had 
the courage to read the above (referring to an unconventional 
heading) I hope you will read on to the end of this epistle 
— thereby displaying real Christian fortitude and learning a 
few facts which I think should be brought to your attention." 



200 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

I then introduced myself, touching upon my ancestry, and 
proceeded as follows: "I take pleasure in informing you 
that I am in the Crazy Business and am holding my job 
down with ease and a fair degree of grace. Being in the 
Crazy Business, I understand certain phases of the business 
about which you know nothing." (Apparently this was 
meant to imply that the Governor himself was not "crazy.") 
"You as Governor are at present 'head devil' in this 'hell,' 
though I know you are unconsciously acting as 'His 
Majesty's' ist Lieutenant." 

I then launched into my arraignment of the treatment of 
the insane. The method, I declared, was "wrong from 
start to finish. The abuses existing here exist in every 
other institution of the kind in the country. They are all 
alike — though some of them are of course worse than others. 
Hell is hell the world over, and I might also add that hell 
is only a great big bunch of disagreeable details anyway. 
That's all an Insane Asylum is. If you don't believe it, 
just go crazy and take up your abode here. In writing this 
letter I am laboring under no mental excitement. I am no 
longer subjected to the abuses about which I complain. I 
am well and happy. In fact I never was so happy as I am 
now. Whether I am in perfect mental health or not, I shall 
leave for you to decide. If I am insane to-day I hope I may 
never recover my Reason." 

My arraig^ment began with the private institution where 
I had been strait-jacketed. I referred to my oppressor 

as "Dr. M.D. (Mentally Deranged)." Then followed 

an account of my strait- jacket experience; then an account 
of abuses at the State Hospital. I described in detail the 
most brutal assault that fell to my lot. In simiming up I 
said, "The attendants claimed next day that I had called 
them certain names. Maybe I did — though I don't be- 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 201 

lieve I did at all. What of it? This is no young ladies' 
boarding school. Should a man be nearly killed because he 
swears at attendants who swear like pirates? I have seen 
at least fifteen men, many of them mental and physical 
wrecks, assaulted just as brutally as I was, and usually with- 
out a cause. I know that men's lives have been shortened 
by these brutal assaults. And that is only a polite way of 
saying that murder has been committed here." Turning 
next to the matter of the women's wards I said: "A patient 
in this ward, — a man in his right mind, who leaves here on 
Tuesday next — told me that a woman patient told him that 
she had seen many a helpless woman dragged along the floor 
by her hair, and had also seen them choked by attendants 
who used a wet towel as a sort of garrote.^ I have been 
through the mill and believe every word of the abuse. You 
will perhaps doubt it, as it seems impossible. Bear in mind, 
though, that everything bad and disagreeable is possible in 
an Insane Asylum." 

I must pause to call the reader's attention to the degree 
of fair-mindedness displayed in the foregoing. Facts I 
stated as facts, but I was wise enough to qualify a state- 
ment incapable of proof. An extravagant imagination does 
not necessarily supersede and suspend judgment. 

When I came to the matter of the "Bull Pen" I wasted 
no words: "The Bull Pen," I wrote, "is a pocket edition of 
the New York Stock Exchange during a panic." 

I next pointed out the difficulties a patient must over- 
come in mailing letters: "It is impossible for any one to 
send a letter to you via the office. The letter would be con- 

1 According to the testimony given before the Congressional Committee 
which, in the early summer of 1906, investigated the Government Hospital 
for the Insane at Washington, D. C, untrained attendants seem prone to 
resort to the use of a wet towel as a sort of garrote. 



202 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

signed to the waste-basket — unless it was a particularly 
crazy letter — in which case it might reach you, as you would 
then pay no attention to it. But a sane letter, and a true 
letter, telling about the abuses which exist here would stand 
no show of being mailed. The way in which mail is tam- 
pered with by the medical staff is contemptible." 

I then described my stratagem in mailing my letter to the 
Governor. Discovering that I had left a page of my episto- 
lary booklet blank, I drew upon it a copy of Rembrandt's 
Anatomy Lesson, and under it wrote: "This page was 
skipped by mistake. Had to fight fifty-three days to get 
writing-paper and I hate to waste any space — hence the 
masterpiece, — drawn in five minutes. Never drew a line 
till September 26 (last) and never took lessons in my life. 
I think you will readily believe my statement." I ask the 
reader to notice here the humorous insight into my artistic 
limitations which I displayed, despite my delusional state 
of mind. Continuing in the same half-deluded, half-banter- 
ing vein, I said: "I intend to immortalize all members of 
medical staff of State Hospital for Insane — when I illus- 
trate my Inferno, which, when written, will make Dante's 
Divine Comedy look like a French Farce." 

I then outlined my plans for reform: "Whether my sug- 
gestions meet with approval or not," I wrote, "will not affect 
the result — though opposition on your part would perhaps 
delay reforms. I have decided to devote the next few years 
of my life to correcting abuses now in existence in every 
asylum in this country. I know how these abuses can be 
corrected and I intend — later on, when I understand the 
subject better — to draw up a Bill of Rights for the Insane. 
Every State in the Union will pass it, because it will be 
founded on the Golden Rule. I am desirous of having the 
co-operation of the Governor of Connecticut, but if my plans 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 



203 



do not appeal to him I shall deal directly with his only supe- 
rior, the President of the United States. When Theodore 
Roosevelt hears my story his blood will boil. I would write 
to him now, but I am afraid he would jump in and correct 
abuses too quickly. And by doing it too quickly too little 
good would be accomplished." The reader wiU here per- 
haps infer ( and rightly) that my fear of hasty executive 
action was really bom of a desire to have a hand in the 
crusade, and I knew that this would be impossible until I 
should have regained my freedom. 

Waxing crafty, yet, as I believed, writing truth, I con- 
tinued: "I need money badly, and if I cared to, I could 
sell my information and services to the New York World or 
New York Journal for a large amount. But I do not intend to 
advertise Connecticut as a Hell-hole of Iniquity, Insanity, 
and Injustice. If the facts appeared in the public press at 
this time, Connecticut would lose caste with her sister States. 
And they would profit by Connecticut's disgrace and cor- 
rect the abuses before they could be put on the rack. As 
these conditions prevail throughout the country, there is no 
reason why Connecticut should get all the abuse and criti- 
cism which would follow any such revelation of disgusting 
abuse; such inhuman treatment of human wrecks. If pub- 
licity is necessary to force you to act — and I am sure it will 
not be necessary — I shaU apply for a writ of habeas corpus, 
and, in proving my sanity to a jury, I shall incidentally 
prove your own incompetence. Permitting such a whirl- 
wind reformer to drag Connecticut's disgrace into open 
court would prove your incompetence." 

For several obvious reasons it is well that I did not at that 
time attempt to convince a jury that I was mentally sound. 
The mere outlining of my ambitious scheme for reform would 
have caused my immediate return to the asylum. For all 



204 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

that, the scheme itself, stripped of its insane trappings, was 
then, as it is to-day, absolutely feasible and sane; and, in 
this assertion, I am supported by the opinions of certain 
alienists who have read my story. According to these 
authorities, my consistent and persistent desire to effect re- 
forms, taken by itself, was not characteristic of any form of 
mental disorder. It was a sane idea; but, taking hold of 
me, as it did, while my imagination was at white heat, I was 
impelled to attack my problem with compromising energy 
and, for a time, in a manner so unconvincing as to obscure 
the essential sanity of my cherished purpose. 

I closed my letter as foUows: "No doubt you will con- 
sider certain parts of this letter rather 'fresh.' I apologize 
for any such passages now, but, as I have an Insane License, 
I do not hesitate to say what I think. What's the use when 
one is caged like a criminal?" 

"P. S. This letter is a confidential one — and is to be 
returned to the writer upon demand." 

The letter was eventually forwarded to my conservator 
and is now in my possession. 

As a result of my protest the Governor immediately 
interrogated the superintendent of the institution where 
" Jekyll-Hyde" had tortured me. Until he laid before the 
superintendent my charges against his assistant, the doctor in 
authority had not even suspected that I had been tortured. 
This superintendent took pride in his institution. He was 
sensitive to criticism and it was natural that he should 
strive to palliate the offense of his subordinate. He said 
that I was a most troublesome patient, which was, indeed, 
the truth; for I had always a way of my own for doing 
the things that worried those in charge of me. In a word, 
I brought to bear upon the situation what I have previously 
referred to as "an uncanny admixture of sanity." 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 205 

The Governor did not meet the assistant physician who 
had maltreated me. The reprimand, if there was to be any, 
was left to the superintendent to administer. 

In my letter to the Governor I had laid more stress upon the 
abuses to which I had been subjected at this private institu- 
tion than I had upon conditions at the State Hospital. This 
may have had some effect on the action he took, or rather 
failed to take. At any rate, as to the State Hospital, no 
action was taken. Not even a word of warning was sent to 
the officials, as I know, for before leaving the institution 
I asked the doctors. It seems to me that the Governor 
was derelict in his duty. If my letter was convincing 
enough to induce him to inquire into a private institution, 
surely he should have been equally willing to investigate 
charges affecting the institution of which he was the nominal 
head. The least that he could have done would have been 
to convince himself that my charges were untrue. 

Governors, for selfish or political reasons, are only too 
willing to avoid the inevitable political scandal which follows 
nine out of ten investigations of institutions politically organ- 
ized. Instead of humanely considering the just claims of 
the State's unfortunates, men in such positions of power too 
often turn a deaf ear to the cries of the helpless. It is trite 
to observe that the average politician (and most governors 
are such) mistakenly thinks he must have one deaf ear 
which he may interpose between himself and the call of 
duty, while his supposedly "good" ear is reserved for the 
bad advice of better politicians than himself. 

I am far from saying that the Governor in question delib- 
erately suppressed an investigation which his conscience 
dictated. I have good reason to believe that he thought an 
investigation would produce no results of value. He knew 
that, on the whole, the State Hospital was fairly well managed 



2o6 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

— or at least better managed than similar institutions in many 
other States. Further, he knew that the doctors in charge 
were reputable men, and that, if they could not correct 
abuses, a new medical staff would not be likely to do so 
either. Considering the deplorable yet excusable ignorance 
that prevails in reference to the treatment of insanity and 
the proper management of institutions for the insane, the 
action of the Governor was logical and, without doubt, 
honest. In fact, I question whether one Governor in ten 
in this country to-day has ever heard the word "Non-Re- 
straint," — much less understands that a thorough enforcement 
of its principles will eliminate a majority of existing abuses. 



Though my letter did not bring about an investigation it 
was not altogether without fruit. Naturally, it was with 
considerable satisfaction that I informed the doctors that I 
had outwitted them in their endeavor to keep me in exile; 
and it was with even greater satisfaction that I now saw those 
in authority make a determined, if temporary, effort to pro- 
tect helpless patients against the cruelty of attendants. The 
moment the doctors were convinced that I had gone over 
their heads and had sent a characteristic letter of protest to 
the Governor of the State, that moment they began to pro- 
tect themselves with an energy born of a realization of their 
former shortcomings. Whether or not the management in 
question will admit that their unwonted activity was due to 
my coup, the fact remains that the summary discharge of 
several attendants accused and proved guilty of brutality 
immediately followed, and, for a while, put a stop to wanton 
assaults against which, for a period of four months, I had 
protested in vain. This I know, for certain inmates of the 
violent ward told me that comparative peace reigned about 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 207 

this time. That attendants can be scared into humanity, is 
proved by a remark made to me by one the very day he had 
been discharged for choking a patient into an insensibihty so 
profound that it had been necessary to call a physician to 
restore him. Said this brute: "It seems to me they're get- 
ting pretty damned strict these days, discharging an attendant 
for simply choking a patient." This discharged and guilty 
attendant immediately secured a position in another hospital 
of the same character in a city not twenty miles distant. 



XXV 

My failure to force the Governor to investigate conditions 
at the State Hospital convinced me that I coiild not hope to 
prosecute my reforms until I should have regained my lib- 
erty and re-established myself in my old world. I there- 
fore quitted the role of reformer-militant; and, but for an 
occasional outburst of righteous indignation at some fla- 
grant abuse which obtruded itself upon my notice, my 
demeanor was that of one quite content with his lot in life. 

I was indeed content — I was happy. Knowing that I 
should soon regain my freedom, I foimd it easy to forgive 
— taking great pains not to forget — any injustice which had 
been done me. Liberty is sweet, even to one whose appreci- 
ation of it has never been augmented by its temporary loss. 
The pleasurable emotions which my impending liberation 
aroused within me served to soften my speech and render 
me more tractable. This change the assistant physician was 
not slow to note, though he was rather slow in placing in 
me that degree of confidence which I felt that I deserved. 
So justifiable, however, was his suspicion that even at the 
time I forgave him for it. I had on so many prior occasions 
"played possum" that the doctor naturally attributed complex 
and imfathomable motives to my most innocent acts. For a 
long time he entertained the idea that I was trying to capture 
his confidence, win the privilege of an unlimited parole, and 
so effect my escape from the institution. He had doubt- 
less not forgotten the several plans of escape which I had 
toyed with and bragged about while in the violent ward. 

208 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 209 

Though I was granted considerable liberty during the 
months of April, May, and June, 1903, not until July did I 
enjoy a so-called "unlimited parole" which enabled me to 
walk about the neighboring city unattended. My privi- 
leges were granted so gradually that these first tastes of re- 
gained freedom, though delightful, were not so thrilling as 
one might imagine. I took everything as a matter of course, 
and, except when I deliberately analyzed my feelings, was 
scarcely conscious of my former deprivations. 

This power to forget the past — or recall it only at will — 
has contributed much to my happiness. A majority of 
those who have suffered experiences such as mine are prone 
to brood upon them, and I cannot but attribute my happy 
immunity from unpleasant memories to the fact that I 
have viewed my own case much as a physician might 
view that of a patient. My past is a thing apart. I can 
examine this or that phase of it in the clarifying and 
comforting light of reason. I can, as it were, hold my past 
in my hand and analyze its complex and bewildering collec- 
tion of thoughts under a memory rendered microscopic. 
And I am further comforted by the belief that I have a dis- 
tinct mission in life — a chance for usefulness which might 
never have been mine had I enjoyed unbroken health. 

The last few months of my life in the hospital were much 
alike, save that each succeeding one brought with it an 
increased degree of liberty. My hours now passed pleas- 
antly. Time did not drag, for I was engaged upon some 
matter, every minute. I would draw, read, write, and talk. 
If any feeling was dominant it was my feeling for art; and, 
had I then been forced to choose irrevocably a life-work, I 
should have decided in favor of the study of art. I read 
with avidity books on that subject. In fact, I have never 
read any books with greater interest than these, which, to- 



210 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

day, interest me scarcely at all. For, strange as it may seem, 
the moment I again found myself in the world of business 
my desire to become an artist died almost as suddenly as it 
had been born. Though my artistic ambition was clearly 
an outgrowth of my abnormal condition, and languished 
when normality asserted itself, I am inclined to believe I 
should even now take a lively interest in the study of art if 
I were so situated as to be deprived of a free choice of my 
mode of life. The use of words now enthralls me because 
it is eminently suited to my purposes; and its mere utility 
is re-enforced by a perhaps instinctive though long-latent 
desire for expression. 

During the summer of 1903, friends and relatives often 
called to see me. The talks we had were of great and last- 
ing benefit to me. Though I had rid myself of my more 
extravagant and impossible delusions of grandeur — flying 
machines and the like — I still discussed with intense ear- 
nestness other schemes, which, though allied to delusions 
of grandeur, were, in truth, still more closely allied to san- 
ity itself. My talk was of that high but perhaps suspi- 
cious type in which Imagination overrules Common Sense. 
Lingering delusions, as it were, made great projects seem 
easy. That they were at least feasible under certain condi- 
tions my mentors admitted. Only I was in an insane hurry 
to produce results. Work that I now understand cannot 
be accomplished in less than five or ten years, if, indeed, in 
a life -time, I then believed could be accomplished in a 
year or two, and by me single-handed. Had I had none 
but insane persons to talk with I might have continued to 
cherish a distorted perspective. As it was, the unanimity 
of sane opinions helped me to correct my views; and I am 
confident that each talk with relatives and friends hastened 
my return to normality. 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 211 

Though I was not discharged from the State Hospital until 
September loth, 1903, during the preceding month I visited 
my home several times, once for three days. These trips 
were not only interesting but steadying in their effect. I 
willingly returned to the hospital for the remaining days of 
my confinement. Though several friends expressed sur- 
prise at this willingness to enter again an institution where 
I had experienced so many hardships, to me my temporary 
return was not in the least irksome. As I had penetrated 
and conquered the mysteries of that dark side of life, it no 
longer held any terrors for me. Nor does it to this day. I 
can contemplate the future with a greater degree of com- 
placency than can those whose lot in life has been uniformly 
fortunate. In fact, I said at that time that, should my con- 
dition ever demand it, I would again enter a hospital for the 
insane, quite as willingly as the average person now enters 
a general hospital for the treatment of a bodily ailment. 

It was in this complacent and confident mood, and with- 
out any sharp line of transition, that I again began life in 
my old world of companionship and of business. 



PART II 



XXVI 

After again becoming a free man, my mind would not 
abandon the miserable ones whom I had left behind. I 
thought with horror that my reason had been threatened 
and baffled at every turn. Without malice toward those 
who had had me in charge, I yet looked with contempt 
upon the system by which I had been treated. 

The word "hospital" should be one of the most comfort- 
ing in the language. Yet I know that probably in every 
State in the Union men and women on the verge of collapse 
have killed themselves to escape commitment — and 
others, having survived confinement, have deliberately 
chosen death rather than re-commitment. As a patient, in 
my hearing, once remarked: "I'd rather be hung than kiUed 
an inch at a time." This thought was more forcefully ex- 
pressed by an ex-patient whose case was brought to my at- 
tention by the Kentucky lawyer-attendant already referred 
to. He had been temporarily cured, but seemed threatened 
with a return of his malady. Divining the secret purpose of 
his relatives to return him to an asylum, where he had for- 
merly been terribly abused, he shot himself through the heart. 
A message left by this victim of public indifference, or (shall 
I say?) ignorance, read as follows: 

"I'd rather die than go back there." 

Only within about twenty years has the public taken 
kindly even to "general" hospitals, and only within the 
last decade have hospitals for the insane begun to lose their 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 213 

forbidding suggestiveness. Even to-day they are almost uni- 
versally regarded with dread. Why? Partly because of 
man's instinctive dread of insanity itself; but quite as much, 
I think, because of the terrifying air of mystery which 
for generations has enshrouded these institutions. This 
air of mystery, fostered by the secretive conduct of our 
asylums, has been perpetuated and, indeed, in a large de- 
gree, created, by rumors and occasional proof of abuses 
appearing now and then in the public print. Thus it 
is that the shortcomings of the State itself often force a 
desperately despondent man to take that life which it is the 
duty of the State to protect. For these avoidable suicides 
we cannot, however, wholly blame the present manage- 
ments of our existing hospitals. They are partly the re- 
sult of that dread of insanity and asylums which has been 
bequeathed to us by past centuries — a dread that will 
continue to force men to a self-inflicted death until a univer- 
sal confidence in such hospitals, and a rational view of 
insanity itself, shall obtain. 



XXVII 

I HAVE authority for the statement that there is no specific 
for insanity or for any phase or type thereof. For the most 
part, all that any system of treatment can hope to do is to 
give nature a chance to right itself by surrounding the pa- 
tient with the best possible conditions. Yet, in most 
instances, this is precisely what is not done. 

What then are some of the causes for this state of things, 
and what are some of the remedies ? Of improved sanitary 
equipment I shall speak later. Here let me speak at length 
only of food and of dining facilities. 

During the past century the insane, as a class, have per- 
haps been the poorest fed. Not many generations ago it 
was universally the custom to feed them on veritable husks, 
scarce fit for swine. In some communities to-day they have 
to be content with the coarsest food, frequently of such qual- 
ity that a sane person would refuse to eat it. Attendants, 
whose fare is little, if any better, can testify to this fact. Indeed 
they do occasionally testify forcefully by threatening to stop 
work unless the management improve the quality of their 
rations. Such protests are usually effective. But what can 
patients do to emphasize their protest? Nothing, except 
to stop eating — a course which many of them take from 
time to time, until the instinct of self-preservation overcomes 
their eminently sane disgust. 

Though there are to-day in this country comparatively 
few institutions where patients and attendants are fed as 
well as they deserve, it is my opinion that the several man- 

214 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 215 

agements are entitled to considerable credit for the great 
improvement that has been made in this particular depart- 
ment during the past score of years. In many institutions 
an honest attempt is being made to provide nothing but 
wholesome food. Unfortunately it is equally true that in 
some institutions dishonest officials consider the happiness 
of their charges of so little moment that for a few mean dol- 
lars they will barter it away according to the rules of that 
discredited political game, "Graft." Whenever and wher- 
ever the members of a medical or executive staff of a hospital 
for the insane are dependent upon a political party or polit- 
ical "boss" for their continuance in office, you will be apt 
to find in operation a pernicious system of perquisites which 
can be wrung from the State's appropriations only at the 
expense of the inmates of the hospitals. This " graft, " which 
first strikes at the consciences of the men in authority, at one 
and the same time strikes the inmates in that most vulnerable 
spot — the stomach. Each and every state-appropriated 
dollar that is diverted by a dishonest manager or manage- 
ment means just so much less comfort for the inmates, who 
already suffer unnecessary hardships because of inadequate 
appropriations. The quality and quantity of food provided 
is sure to be adversely affected. Usually it is the purchasing 
of supplies which affords the only sure opportunity for 
"graft," and as a major part of the appropriations must be 
spent for food, dishonesty, where it. exists, affects vitally the 
well-being of the patients. To the mind of every right- 
thinking person, the political "grafter," who will wring 
his mean gains from the very blood of the most unfortunate, 
is a man deserving of discovery and its consequent disgrace 
and punishment. I predict that honest legislative investiga- 
tions will uncover many miserable specimens of humanity 
who for years have fattened by the emaciation of misery itself. 



2i6 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

In arguing for a right quantity and quality of food I do 
not mean that a State should be expected to provide a great 
variety. At this stage of hospital development that is of 
course impossible. But at least an illusion of variety might 
be created if the menus were not decided upon months in 
advance. To know that certain articles of food will appear 
on a certain day of the week, each week, each month, is to 
rob a patient of that element of surprise which in itself 
serves as an appetizer. 

During the first six months of my confinement at the State 
Hospital, though I finally grew tired of the food provided 
and had difficulty in swallowing enough of it to satisfy 
hunger, the most serious fault I had to find with it was with 
respect to its quantity. Not until I was admitted to the 
common dining-room of the ward was I able to satisfy my 
hunger. Then, for nearly a month — this after two months 
of eating in comparative solitude — I ate two, sometimes 
three, of the regular portions at each meal. This was not 
gluttony — lack of variety, if nothing else, protected me 
against sinful indulgence. It was occasioned by an instinc- 
tive desire to repair the damage done during my period of 
"seclusion." That my loss in weight already referred to was 
occasioned more by privation than by my state of mind, or 
the abuse to which I was subjected, is borne out by an earlier 
experience; for during my strait- jacket ordeal at the private 
hospital I was given nourishing food at frequent intervals 
and I left the padded cell weighing nearly as much as the 
day I first entered it. 

A majority of patients to-day are fed in small dining-rooms 
connected with the ward in which they happen to be con- 
fined. The food is sent from the main kitchen to these 
centers of distribution and there apportioned and served by 
attendants. The attendants are supposed to allow the 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 217 

patients a sufficient time to eat their meal, but it frequently 
happens that certain ones have not finished eating when the 
attendant in charge says: "All up!" In a violent ward, and 
sometimes in others, any patient who fails to obey that com- 
mand invites abuse. More than once have I seen a patient 
forced to leave a half- eaten meal and quit the room — or 
perhaps be forcibly ejected; and I myself have often pru- 
dently stowed away in a hurry an adequate amount of food 
within an uncertain and arbitrarily limited time. One of 
the most revolting and least justifiable assaults I ever wit- 
nessed occurred in the dining-room of the violent ward at 
the State Hospital. When the patient had been kicked and 
choked into a state bordering on insensibility the attendants 
calmly, but breathlessly, returned to their own meal. I shud- 
der when I think of the punishment that would have been 
mine had circumstances forced me to enter a violent ward 
during that stage of my illness which was characterized by a 
continued refusal to eat what was placed before me — ex- 
cept when my inscrutable impulses directed otherwise. It is 
my conviction that this book would never have been written 
had not a "timely generosity" kept me from such abuse 
while mute and crippled. 

But in a hospital which has that modern improvement 
known as an associate dining-hall, such abuses as I have 
described cannot affect a majority of the patients. The 
State Hospital in which I was confined, now has as good a 
dining-hall of this type as any in the country; and its out- 
lying groups of buildings have smaller ones. This associate 
or "congregate" dining-hall was first used about three months 
before I was discharged; consequently I am in a position to 
contrast its advantages with the shortcomings of the ward 
dining-rooms. The associate hall in question had a seating 
capacity of twelve hundred. This fact in itself is perhaps 



2l8 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

surprising, for most people picture an asylum for the insane 
as a place of great disorder, if not riot. Yet day after day, 
twelve hundred insane men and women here gather and 
partake of the indifferent, though wholesome and life-sus- 
taining, food provided by the State. And this, too, with 
relatively less disorder than will be found among an equal 
number of undergraduates at any of our great universities 
where similar dining-halls are in operation. 

In an associate dining-room, under the eyes of one or more 
of the assistant physicians, the solicitous consideration for 
his charges on the part of the brutal type of attendant is 
positively refreshing, even if inspired by the motive of self- 
interest. Aside from the personal safety of the patient 
which thus results, there are many other advantages. The 
patient is sure to get a sufficient amount of food and an ample 
allowance of time in which to eat it. Usually an hour is 
allowed for each meal — that time including the walking 
to and from the dining-hall. In this way the inmates are 
able to while away three hours of the long day. At noon 
and night an orchestra enlivens the meal. That this music 
has much to do with the good order that obtains is an ad- 
mitted fact, for it has been proved that music is an excel- 
lent medicine for the mentally disturbed. It is to be 
regretted that the associate dining-hall does not utterly 
eliminate the abuses which exist in so many wards. Un- 
fortunately only those able to take some care of themselves 
are permitted to enjoy its advantages. Those most in need 
of protection are still left to the uncertain ministrations of 
unwatched attendants. 



XXVIII 

Worse than the negligent treatment of the body is a vexa- 
tious treatment, of the mind itself. I have already made it 
clear that unjustifiable interference with the mail-matter of 
the patient is a common practice. This may be aptly desig- 
nated as the major petty abuse of that multitude of petty 
abuses which help to make the lot of the insane so hard. 

Next to the instinctive desire for freedom, which naturally 
inspires almost every inmate of an asylum, perhaps the 
commonest desire is to be allowed to write and receive letters 
as he had been accustomed to do before his commitment. 
This gives rise to the universal bone of contention on which 
doctors and patients chew — yes, and over which they growl 
and snarl. Every day in the year, year in and year out, in 
the majority of such institutions, this battle is waged. The 
patients chafe under censorship, let alone confiscation. 

In the main they are right. It is without question unjust, 
as it is, indeed, illegal, that a patient should be denied the 
privilege of communicating, almost at will, with at least his 
legally appointed conservator. Yet doctors of the despot 
type do censor and frequently destroy letters, — except in 
those rare instances when a patient writes a string of silly 
nothings, or speaks in complimentary terms of the institu- 
tion and its management. But missives of the latter sort 
are naturally rare — and will continue to be so until the sev- 
eral managements begin to inspire encomiums by deserving 
them. The elimination of this one abuse would go far to 
eliminate others which grow out of it. On the other 

219 



220 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

hand, when the physical and allied abuses shall have been 
done away with, there will be less temptation to interfere 
with patients' correspondence; for, the moment patients are 
universally treated with consideration they will be pretty 
likely to declare that fact in their letters. Then, not only 
will the doctors in authority not censor and wantonly destroy 
these letters — they will exert themselves to keep patients in 
close and honest touch with their relatives and friends. 

I, perhaps, feel more strongly on this subject than on 
almost any other. I know what it is to be kept in an exile so 
complete that I could not send a message of any sort to my 
legally appointed conservator — my own brother; and that, 
too, at a time when I greatly desired to ask him for assist- 
ance in my fight against abuse and positive danger. This 
situation occurred first at the private hospital where I was 
strait- jacketed for three weeks. Within a month of its first 
occurrence it occurred again at the State Hospital. Indeed, 
so long as I wrote letters at these two institutions, except for 
a short initial period at each, I never felt sure that my let- 
ters were not being held or destroyed by the doctors in 
authority, — and with reason. My letters were on several 
occasions confiscated — letters, too, which there was no 
excuse for so treating, except that they contained nothing 
but the truth. Though many of my letters were finally 
forwarded to my conservator, in a few conspicuous instances 
they were destroyed without the knowledge of either my 
conservator or myself. I have already described how an 
assistant physician arbitrarily denied my request that I be 
permitted to send a birthday letter to my father, thereby not 
merely exceeding his authority and ignoring decency, but, 
consciously or unconsciously, stifling a sane impulse. That 
this should occur while I was confined in the Bull Pen was 
not so surprising. But, about four months later, while I 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 221 

was an inmate of one of the best wards, a similar though 
less open interference occurred. At this time I was so 
nearly normal that my discharge was but a question of a few 
months. Anticipating my return to my old world I decided 
to begin the re-establishment of old relations. Accordingly, 
my brother, at my suggestion, informed certain friends that 
I should be pleased to receive letters from them. They soon 
wrote. In the meantime the doctor had been instructed to 
deliver to me any and all letters that might arrive. He did 
so for a time, and that without censoring. As was to be ex- 
pected, after nearly three practically letterless years, I found 
rare delight in replying to my re-awakened correspondents. 
Yet some of these letters, written for the deliberate purpose 
of re-establishing myself in the sane world, were destroyed by 
the doctor in authority. At the time, not one word did he 
say to me about the matter. I had handed him for maihng 
certain letters, unsealed. He did not mail them, nor did he 
forward them to my conservator as he should have done, 
and had earlier agreed to do with all letters which he 
could not see his way clear to approve. It was fully a 
month before I learned that my friends had not received my 
replies to their letters. Then I accused the doctor of de- 
stroying them, and he, with belated frankness, admitted that 
he had done so. He offered no better excuse for his action 
than the mere statement that he did not approve of the sen- 
timents I had expressed. Another flagrant and typical in- 
stance of such interference was that of a letter addressed to 
me in reply to one which I had mailed surreptitiously. The 
person to whom I wrote, a friend of years' standing, later 
informed me that he had sent the reply. I never received 
it. Neither did my conservator. Were it not that I feel 
absolutely sure that the letter in question was received at 
the hospital and destroyed, I should not now raise this point. 



222 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

But such a point, if raised at all, must of course be made 
without that direct proof which can come only from the 
man guilty of an act which in the sane world is regarded as 
odious and criminal. If a crime in the sane world, surely 
it is doubly a crime when its commission injures a person 
already stripped of most of his privileges by the laws of 
the State. 

My experience in this respect was not exceptional. I 
know in my own heart that during the past year thousands 
of the inmates of our asylums have been subjected to like 
unjust treatment, and during the past century, tens of thou- 
sands. At this very moment many patients quite 
capable of writing fairly lucid, even sane, letters, are, for 
any one of a number of reasons, kept out of touch 
with relatives and friends. These sjonpathizers would 
gladly keep in closer touch with the afflicted ones, if they 
were advised to do so by the hospital authorities. But, 
instead of encouraging such beneficial intercourse, doctors, 
with few exceptions, at least tacitly discourage it. Occa- 
sionally those in authority frankly advise against it. When 
such advice is given the doctors explain at plausible length 
that the receiving and reading of messages from home tends 
I to excite the patient — especially when the patient first enters 
I an institution. To my mind this procedure is wrong. It 
is, indeed, worse than an error of judgment. It is a posi- 
tive cruelty. The patient when committed has enough to 
contend against without being forced to fight for his life and 
liberty imsupported by messages from those he loves — or, 
for that matter, even temporarily hates. The first weeks of 
exile are the ones which determine the patient's attitude 
toward his new and distressing environment. If to a pa- 
tient's sense of loneliness there be added the suspicion or 
belief that his relatives and friends have forsaken him, does 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 223 

it not stand to reason that his recovery will be retarded, if, 
indeed, the consequent dejection does not forever render 
recovery impossible? 

I do not exaggerate when I say that this interference with 
a privilege which is part of the birthright of every American 
citizen causes more anguish among the insane than physical 
abuse. One can suffer an incredible amount of physical 
abuse, and forget and forgive. But the opening and illegal 
confiscating of letters is nothing short of dishonorable in 
the eyes of men and women brought up to respect the 
sealed messages of others. The moment a patient proves 
to himself — and the proof is seldom wanting — that his 
mail is being tampered with, that moment he loses all confi- 
dence in the doctors. As insanity itself in a majority of 
cases is characterized by an inordinate suspicion of others, 
is it sensible or scientific for a management to forever under- 
mine the very grounds of belief that must be established if a 
recovery is to be hastened, or ever secured ? 

I will admit that there may be an occasional instance 
where messages from home might prove detrimental, but 
such cases are so rare as to justify my contention that every 
patient, from the moment of commitment, should be allowed 
a high degree of liberty in the matter of correspondence. 
His letters, both incoming and outgoing, should not be sub- 
jected to the scrutiny of officials whose burdensome duties 
so often render impossible anything like a fair inspection of 
the patients' mail. Indeed, the only type of physician that 
deserves to be invested with powers of censorship is that, I 
regret to say, rare type of man who is so interested in his 
work that he desires to read letters for the purpose of judg- 
ing, with scientific precision, a patient's state of mind at a 
given time. Without question, written thoughts furnish an 
invaluable basis for diagnosis, and to deprive a high-minded 



224 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

psychiatrist of the privilege of scientific scrutiny of mail- 
matter — which term I use in contradistinction to scrutiny 
of the more common, self-protecting sort condemned — 
would no doubt work an injustice to all concerned. Never- 
theless, in view of the fact that comparatively few physicians 
working among the insane seem able to censor mail in the 
right rather than the wrong spirit, I feel safe in recommend- 
ing that a letter written by a patient should be sent without 
censoring, or not be sent at all. Inasmuch as a psychia- 
trist genuinely interested in the welfare of a given patient 
will, perforce, be on the best of terms with his conservator, 
and, in most instances, with the patient himself, it will be an 
easy matter for him to secure copies of a patient's letters — 
or the originals — simply by stating his reasons to the con- 
servator and asking for what he wants. In this way, free- 
dom of communication with the outside world may be main- 
tained and the interests of the patient — and physician — 
conserved. In contending that letters written by a patient 
should be forwarded unopened, unread, I do not mean that 
the inmate of an asylum should be permitted to write to any 
and all persons. For his own protection, and the protection 
of the pubhc, he should be allowed to write only to those des- 
ignated by the persons who effect his commitment, provided 
the list contain at least one other name besides that of his 
appointed conservator. This second person should be one 
who is interested in the welfare of the patient, for it fre- 
quently happens that the legally appointed conservator is 
derelict in his duty. A committed person should be per- 
mitted to write at will to his conservator, and to the one 
other person selected by himself — or selected for him, 
should he himself express no choice. In addition to these 
two persons, as many other relatives and friends should be 
placed on the list as the conservator may see fit to designate. 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 225 

Such an arrangement would relieve the doctors both of work 
and of responsibility. Instead of censoring every letter, as 
they now feel called upon to do, they would need only to 
satisfy themselves that a patient's letter was addressed to 
some one of his authorized correspondents.^ 

An objection which the doctors have in the past enter- 
tained toward this suggestion is that the patient will perhaps 
use improper language in his letters. It cannot be denied 
that in every such hospital there are always a few patients 
whose condition of mind will impel them to write with a 
brutal frankness likely to offend the taste of the fastidious. 
The fact is, however, that there are no patients at any time 
in any hospital whose letters will seriously offend the sensi- 
bilities of the two or three selected representatives whose 
bounden duty it is to share the afflicted one's burden. 
Surely a patient's letters need not distress his relatives and 
friends more than his unwilling silence. Further, let such 
relatives and friends ask themselves whether they would 
rather be obliged to read or, alas! to write such letters. 

Those patients whose mental disease is of a form charac- 
terized by prevarication — a kind not common — will soon 
prove the fact in their letters. After that fact has been 
proved the recipients of the letters will be able to judge their 
contents and act accordingly. Such lies can do no one harm, 
and the mere telling of them may, perhaps, do the patient 
good. It seems to be an almost universal belief that the 
statements of insane persons are to be regarded with a de- 
gree of suspicion that amounts to disbelief. On this point 

1 In some States the law provides that a patient may write to designated 
State officials and that such letters shall be forwarded, uncensored. As far 
as it goes it is a good law. But how far does it go ? Would it not be better to 
put and keep the patient in close and honest touch with relatives and friends 
by adopting some such plan as I have ventured to suggest ? Blood is thicker 
and warmer than the chilly waters of impersonal officialism. 
16 

1 • 



226 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

I feel qualified to speak. Aside from delusions (which have 
nothing to do with the question) there is, I am sure, not a 
less degree of truth spoken among a given number of insane 
persons than among a like number of sane persons indis- 
criminately selected. The insane, as a class, are the most 
outspoken speakers of the truth to be found anywhere, in that 
respect rivaling the proverbial child. Freed from the restrain- 
ing conventions of polite society, if they have an opinion to 
offer they rid themselves of it without reserve. And it is this 
very freedom of expression (aside from delusions) which, in 
my opinion, puts the statement of the average insane person 
on a par with the reserved, self-interested, and frequently 
biased statements of the average sane member of society at 
large. I argue with one thought in mind: that the inmates 
of an asylum are, on the whole, as well qualified to teU the 
truth regarding its abuses as the inhabitants of the sane 
world are to describe abuses in their respective spheres of 
activity. 

As conditions now are, hundreds of these true accounts 
of abuse are each year confiscated by those, directly of in- 
directly, guilty of it. And much that makes the fives of the 
inmates so miserable has continued so long because of the 
ease with which a careless, if not criminal, management may 
cover its tracks. A due observance of the Hberty of corre- 
spondence would go far to destroy this unjust immunity. 
Physicians to-day often declare that their one thought in 
controUing the correspondence of an insane charge is that 
he may thus be kept in a calm and peaceful state of mind. 
But their real motive is likely to be nothing more than a sel- 
fish — if not cowardly — desire to protect themselves 
against well merited criticism by the pubfic. Oftentimes 
this self-protecting attitude of the medical staff may be traced 
to the known but not openly expressed wish of a timid Board 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 227 

of Trustees, or to the wish of supposedly influential poli- 
ticians, who perhaps ask no more of the management of an 
institution than that it shall so conduct affairs as to avoid 
"investigations" or so-called "hospital scandals." Thus 
the sick insane are made to suffer, for no better reason, 
apparently, than that certain sane persons in positions of 
responsibihty may escape annoyance. 

What will put an end to this disgraceful state of affairs? 
Many elaborate statutes would seem, on their face, to pro- 
tect patients against every imaginable abuse. Yet they fail, 
and will continue to fail, until there is a militant public sen- 
timent of sufficient strength to coerce the several hospital 
managements into a vigilant and considerate activity. The 
lasting correction of evils lies with the public, therefore it 
behooves each individual to contribute his word or deed to 
the total effect. 



XXIX 

The central problem in the care of the insane is the 
elimination of actual physical abuse. What I have nar- 
rated from my own experience and from the experiences 
of others makes clear enough the nature of the average 
attendant. Under a bad regime their baser natures grad- 
ually gain the mastery. Surprising as it may seem, many 
an assault is due in the last analysis to a wanton desire to 
satisfy what amounts to a craving for human blood. This 
fact is well illustrated in the remark of an attendant, in the 
Kentucky institution already referred to, who said, "When 
I came here if any one had told me that I would be guilty 
of striking a patient I would have called him crazy himself, 
but now I take delight in punching hell out of them." 

What is responsible for the development of the brutal 
attendant and his continued existence? 

In the first place, not only do locks and bars protect men 
mean enough to abuse the helpless, the sense of security 
itself really inspires them to wicked deeds. And this feeling 
of security is strengthened by the knowledge that chance 
witnesses can but rarely testify convincingly in a court of 
law. Being removed from the restraining influence of sane 
eyes, the attendant does not fear to abuse, or (the vicious 
type) even sometimes to kill a patient. At the worst he sees no 
greater penalty in store for him than the loss of his position. 
The chance of arrest and trial is so remote as to escape 
consideration; and a trial has few terrors for such attend- 
ants as are arrested, for acquittal is almost certain. In- 

228 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 229 

deed, on those rare occasions when attendants happen to be 
indicted for murder or manslaughter, the public generally 
gives them the benefit of the doubt, assuming that their work 
is highly dangerous, and arguing that the occasional sacrifice 
of the life of an insane patient is unavoidable, therefore jus- 
tifiable. In this the public is in error, for, though the work 
in question may be, and at times is, harassing, it is, by no 
means, peculiarly hazardous. The number of unprovoked 
attacks made upon attendants by insane patients is, in fact, 
small, and would become almost negligible were all patients 
treated kindly from the moment of commitment. 

But can we put all the blame on attendants for assaulting 
patients when the management shows no aggressive disposi- 
tion to protect the latter? Such indifference is far more 
reprehensible than the cowardly conduct of ill-paid men, the 
majority of whom have had few advantages of education. 
The professional thug-attendant who, when a fellow-attend- 
ant is assaulting a patient, deliberately turns his back so 
that he may say, if ever questioned, that he saw no assault, 
is, in my opinion, less deserving of censure than those doc- 
tors who, knowing that brutality is common in their institu- 
tion, weakly resign themselves to what they call "conditions." 

Much of the suffering among the insane to-day is, in my 
opinion, due to the giving of too much authority to assistant 
physicians. Many of them, especially the young and inex- 
perienced, are not to be trusted implicitly. Or, if they are 
to be given almost absolute authority over the patients in 
wards assigned to their care, let the superintendent exercise 
his authority to set aside any order which he may deem in- 
expedient or unjust. All superintendents have such author- 
ity. What I wish to emphasize is that they too often fail to 
exercise it. As a result of their laxness, or timidity — a 
timidity perhaps inspired by a misconception of the ethics 



230 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

of their profession — the helpless patient is permitted un- 
necessarily to suffer; and, I regret to record, frequently is 
this suffering of the patient due to what seems a selfish de- 
sire of the superintendent to preserve peace in his official 
family — the medical staff. OfiScial peace at such a price 
amounts to crime.^ 

But quite as culpable as lax discipline is the selfish desire 
on the part of doctors in authority to escape annoying inves- 
tigations. When it does happen that they cannot avoid 
reporting felonious assaults or suspected m^urders to the 
proper authorities, their action, I regret to say, is too often in 
mere self-defense, and not from a righteous desire to protect 
their patients. Knowing that the battered and mutilated 
condition of the corpse, or a living victim of abuse, for that 
matter, will arouse suspicion on the part of the relatives of 
the victim, those in authority sometimes take the initiative 
in order to "save their face." In making this assertion I am 
well within the bounds of charity and truth, and the conduct 
of this type of doctor at the subsequent trial invariably is 
such as to support my contention. This behavior is quite 
human; for, let it be borne in mind that almost every honest 
investigation into these suspicious deaths reveals a greater 
or less degree — sometimes a criminal degree — of neglect 
on the part of the doctors themselves. If cornered at last 
by an aroused public opinion they are too ready to shift the 
responsibility upon the ignorant and untrained attendants 

^ Of course there is much to be said in favor of giving a high degree 
of authority to an assistant physician, — provided his commanding officer, 
the superintendent, be a man whose own standard of efficiency is so high 
that he will, perforce, support his co-workers in their eiTorts to produce the 
best results. Thus a young physician, instead of having, at the very begin- 
ing of his career, all ambition and initiative ground out of him by that 
sodden and fatal sort of hospital routine into which he is so often forced to 
sink, will have an opportunity to develop into a man of capacity and in- 
creased usefulness. 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 231 

whose brutality is but the reflex of the doctors' indifference, 
neglect, or cowardice. But this is the last resort. Usually 
they will first equivocate to the verge of deliberate false- 
hood. They will outrun the public by giving the benefit of 
all doubts to the attendants. Not to do so would in many 
cases cause the accused to turn on them and reveal condi- 
tions they would prefer to hide. Human nature, like Nature 
herself, is influenced by immutable laws. Self-interest is apt 
to kill one's higher feelings. To fight the fight of the op- 
pressed, the outraged, the dead, too frequently forces one to 
abandon a chosen career. Therefore, the still voice of a 
timid conscience whispers (in a perverted sense): "Let the 
dead bury their dead." 

I cannot lay too much stress on this absolute fact: that ^^ 
hospital managements deliberately, wilfully, and selfishly 
suppress evidence which, if presented to the proper author- 
ities, would lead to the conviction of guilty attendants, and 
eventually to their almost complete elimination from asylums. / 
Several instances of such suppression have come to my^ 
attention since my discharge, two of which I shall now cite. 
During the summer of 1907, a Committee of Investigation 
appointed by the Legislature of the State of New Jersey, un- 
covered, several months after the commission of the crime, 
the suppressed evidence of the murder of a patient by at- 
tendants at the Trenton State Hospital. On the witness- 
stand the hospital official in authority admitted that the 
attendants had killed the patient and that their only punish- 
ment had been their prompt discharge as employees. He 
further admitted that the "scandal" had been deliberately 
suppressed, and that no evidence or report of the crime had 
been submitted to the proper authorities as is, of course, 
required by law. So skilfully was this crime concealed that 
even the wife of the victim was unable to learn the cause of 



232 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

her husband's death until the investigators laid bare the facts. 
And this same Committee of Investigation uncovered an- 
other alleged and, to my mind, proved murder in another 
State Hospital for the Insane — at Morris Plains, New Jer- 
sey. Here, again, the "scandal" (a hospital euphemism for 
"murder" and lesser crimes) was "hushed-up" or "white- 
washed." When it was finally dragged into the light of 
day, what happened? Those in authority, making char- 
acteristic use of the ignorance of the pubHc regarding such 
matters, brazenly, I think, denied in sweeping terms, and 
under oath, the incriminating evidence of supposedly cred- 
ible witnesses. If an investigation in New Jersey can re- 
veal two unreported murders that occurred within a year in 
two State Hospitals, how many such crimes would be un- 
earthed should the two hundred and twenty-six public and 
one hundred and two private hospitals for the insane in this 
country be honestly investigated ? The probable figure is too 
appalling to print. 

Hospital" managements (not only the doctors, but the 
trustees as well) are too often cowardly bodies of men. They 
shun publicity, and thereby sacrifice the well-being of their 
unfortunate charges. If they would act promptly and rig- 
orously when abuse is even suspected, they would need have 
no fear that the public would not support them. But, so 
long as they continue to suppress facts which no good citizen 
in the sane world would dare or wish to suppress, just so 
long will they stand in danger of being dragged into a com- 
promising prominence by those reformers who, from time 
to time, Hke Dorothea Lynde Dix, succeed in penetrating 
the mysteries of their exclusive society. Nor can they surely 
tell when and where the lightning of accusation will strike. 
And if, instead of sporadic lightning, the steady glow of 
enlightenment shall obtain, present incompetent servants of 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 



233 



the public will correct their costly faults, or be forced to seek 
employment in other fields where their innate deficiencies 
will interfere with no one's happiness but their own. 



For bringing the facts to light the method of procedure 
would be simple. Let each Governor, or each State Legis- 
lature, appoint an irreproachable Committee of Investigation. 
Give that Commission as much power both to investigate 
and to recommend legislation as was given to the "Arm- 
strong Committee" of the State of New York, which, in the 
year 1905, so effectively investigated the Life Insurance 
Companies. There should be no taint of politics in such a 
Commission. Common decency and the Golden Rule 
should conspire in its appointment and in its work. 

There should be a country-wide clean-up. Not only 
should existing evils be brought to light; but any abuses 
found to have existed during the two or three years preced- 
ing an investigation should be revealed and pubhshed to the 
world. And the inmates must have a fair hearing — a 
thing they have seldom enjoyed. I do not advocate hostile 
investigations. Nevertheless, the whole truth should be 
obtained regardless of whom it hits or hurts. The spirit 
of improvement, not prosecution, should control. Though 
hospital officials, and others able to throw light on the situa- 
tion, should be subjected to rigorous examination, under 
oath, investigators should strive to bring out and empha- 
size facts which will lead to a permanent improvement of 
conditions, rather than to give undue prominence to the more 
spectacular evidence of abuses. Inquiry into the condition 
of the patients themselves should be the prime consideration. 
This line of investigation will inevitably lead to the uncov- 
ering — where they exist — of the lesser evils of careless, 



234 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

extravagant, or, in some instances, dishonest management of 
funds. 

Inasmuch as hospitals for the insane are the closest of 
"close corporations," it is essential that the investigators 
and the hospital officials (including Trustees or Managers) 
should meet with an honest desire to improve conditions 
permanently. They should not meet, as they have done so 
often in the past, with the selfish desire to "white- wash" and 
thus fool the pubHc into beheving conditions better than they 
are. Such reports of investigations as I have read support 
my contention that members of the medical staff of a hos- 
pital for the insane are prone to offer excuses, rather than 
give reasons for such abuses as are disclosed by the examin- 
ing authority. And these excuses are usually so plausible 
as to defeat, in many instances, the purposes of an investi- 
gation. For generations, doctors working among the insane 
have had to hide facts, until, finally, convincing evasion 
of fact has become with them an unconscious art. I do 
not mean to say that the officials in question deliberately 
and habitually lie in order to deceive the pubUc. But I 
do say that, having for years been forced by apathetic repre- 
sentatives of the public to work with crude equipment and 
inadequate support, these men have fallen into the weak 
habit of looking at problems of hospital administration from 
a disheartened and apologetic point of view. Given a wrong 
point of view, the rest has been very simple, for so few lay- 
men know what earnest and unremitting effort might ac- 
complish in this field that the plausible and veiled excuses 
of hospital officials are commonly accepted as coin of full 
weight. 

Fortunately the securing of the whole truth does not de- 
pend upon skilful apologists — or upon those whose standard 
of truth has been lowered by years of enforced shoulder- 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 235 

ing of the public's shortcomings. In every improperly con- 
ducted institution there will be found a few attendants, both 
men and women, who at heart loathe the conditions under 
which they are compelled to get their livelihood. These 
would welcome an opportunity to tell the truth and help 
correct the evils which so offend their better natures. The 
only incentive they need is a knowledge that the public will 
support them in a course which, if pursued independently, 
would probably be met with incredulity, and could result 
only in their discharge. It is mainly on such a nucleus of 
witnesses that I rest my complete confidence in the efficacy 
of any honestly conducted investigation — provided the 
testimony adduced be given the publicity it deserves. 

Though hospital officials will say, with tiuth, that pub- 
lic investigations — impending or in progress — seriously 
interfere with the routine work of the medical staff, and 
bring distress to relatives of the inmates by arousing, in 
many instances, unwarranted fears, these considerations, to 
my mind, are of no moment compared to the advantages 
that will be gained by treating a disgrace of heroic propor- 
tions with a remedy equally heroic. In order to effect last- 
ing reforms this whole subject must first be brought home to 
the people. And nothing short of the public investigation 
of enjery institution where the insane are confined can bring 
about the desired result. The interest of the people in a 
given territory can be effectively roused in one way only, and 
that is by investigating the particular hospitals wherein the 
insane of a given community are confined. In this way, 
provided every hospital for the insane, not forgetting the 
private ones, be investigated, interest would be aroused 
throughout the country, for few communities are without 
afflicted representation in the institutions under discussion. 
One word more. Investigators should begin and conclude 



236 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

their labors with dispatch. Let the whole distressing situa- 
tion be cleared up within a few months after the anticipated 
country-wide agitation shall be begun. Te let matters drag 
would be an injustice to all concerned, — especially to the 
patients themselves. 

In conspicuous instances the investigations will reveal a 
satisfactory state of affairs. Fortunately there are a num- 
ber of institutions managed by men both honorable and 
capable. Such managements have nothing to fear. In 
fact, they will only receive that credit which of right should 
redound to those who, in the midst of unfavorable conditions, 
and in spite of a dormant public, have so nobly discharged 
their duty to the least safeguarded of the world's unfortunates. 

With the complete record of past and present conditions 
before the public, those responsible for the evils exposed 
should be offered one more chance of service. This chari- 
table attitude should be adhered to, except in those instances 
where officials under examination stubbornly refuse to co-op- 
erate with a committee of investigation, — or where doctors 
or attendants have been proved guilty of an offense that 
cannot, in justice to the patients and to the public, be for- 
given. But, even in such cases as the latter, charity should 
prevail; and, in view of the fact that these guilty men are, in 
a way, victims of a vicious system, they should be simply 
discharged, rather than branded forever as criminals. 

No doubt many persons, particularly politicians who 
consider the success of their respective parties of more con- 
sequence than the comfort and happiness of a constituency 
bereft of reason and the right to vote, will feel that it would 
be a waste of time to lay bare a distressing, perhaps disgust- 
ing, account of brutalities covering a period that has passed. 
If my insight into a situation of this kind is worth anything, 
the public will do well to weigh my words before listening 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 237 

to the biased opinions of those who fear the truth. An 
investigation covering a short period would be an injustice 
either to the inmates of an institution or to its management, 
or, indeed, to both. A guihy management, anticipating an 
investigation, could and would temporarily correct all discov- 
erable abuses. This very thing has often happened, and 
always will happen so long as the instinct of self-preservation 
persists. Doctors who voluntarily have never lifted a finger 
to protect their patients against abuse sit up nights to cor- 
rect abuses the moment an investigation becomes imminent 
— thus proving how easily their vigilance could be perma- 
nently maintained. 

I shall cite a case in point. I have already made brief 
mention of a stroke of reform brought about in Kentucky 
through the efforts of an ex-attendant. It was during the 
month of September, 1906, that I happened to be traveling in 
that State. As already mentioned I chanced to pick up a copy 
of the Louisville Courier- Journal, in which I saw a heading 
that caught my eye and soon gripped my heart. It read as 
follows: "SAYS PATIENT WAS KILLED — Charge 
Publicly Made By Ex- Attendant." This "ex-attendant," 
whom I now number among my friends, was over six feet in 
height and proportionately powerful. Because of his great 
strength, upon entering the hospital he was at once assigned 
to a so-called "back ward." He demurred at his assignment, 
preferring to work in a ward where the patients were com- 
paratively happy. But the doctors made their orders peremp- 
tory — much to their later regret. For, in the course of 
his work, this full-blooded man saw sights which so out- 
raged his manhood that he protested vehemently to the 
authorities. His protest went unheeded so long as he re- 
mained in the employ of the State. At last, when a helpless 
patient had been killed by his brutal co-workers, he resigned 



238 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

and forced the management to take heed by bringing the 
matter before the Governor of Kentucky who ordered an 
investigation. Then, of course, abuses which might incrimi- 
nate were virtually corrected in a night. Brutality ceased. 
Attendants who, on many occasions, had bathed in a single 
tubful of water as many as fifty men, some of whom had 
pestilential sores on their bodies, immediately adopted a 
more sanitary method; and whereas, under the old method, 
the inmates of an entire ward had been run through a mass 
of cumulative filth within two or three hours, under the en- 
forced sanitary reform it took a like corps of attendants — 
if not the same men — the better part of two days to com- 
plete their task.^ Does not this wonderful change in 
methods (if not change of heart) prove how efficacious 
an aroused and outraged public opinion can really be? 
I say, then, it behooves the public to assume part of the 
burden of the afilicted and oppressed insane by compelling 
the several managements to work as well every day in 
the year as they do when an investigation impends or is 
in progress. 

One might attempt to justify the retention of an at- 
tendant of known brutality by saying cavalierly that one 
vicious attendant is as good as another. This is quite 
true, but it does not excuse the employment of any vicious 
attendants. Nor can a valid excuse for so doing be devised. 
Acceptable if not model attendants can be found if deter- 

1 These statements regarding improper methods of bathing — an almost 
universal abuse in hospitals for the insane — are based on an affidavit given 
me by the "ex-attendant" who instigated the Kentucky investigation. 
Though the aforementioned abuse is vi'idespread, its remedy is within easy 
reach. Let hospital managements abolish stationary tubs entirely and 
install in their stead modem shower baths and the like. However, any law 
or rule governing this matter should not be so strict as to prevent the use of 
a tub in the giving of the so-called " continuous bath" to excited patients. 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 239 

mined efforts are made. Weakly taking for granted that 
the riff-raff which drifts from one hospital to another must 
be accepted, the doctors seldom think of actively searching 
for good material. Yet, in my opinion, this is one of their 
prime duties. No other detail of management is more im- 
portant. The difficulty is not insurmoimtable. There are 
not a few superintendents who have little trouble in secur- 
ing an adequate number of fairly competent attendants, but 
these are usually the heads of institutions conducted on 
Non-Restraint principles. This fact is not surprising. The 
better element among those who seek employment as attend- 
ants, naturally look for it where the patients are treated with 
the most consideration; for there the lot of the attendants 
is not only bearable, but, oftentimes, a happy one. 

Brutal attendants are arrant cowards. They would fear 
to lose their positions more than do most classes of workers, 
if they were made to realize that the slightest infraction of 
the rules will insure immediate dismissal. The trouble to- 
day is that superintendents, generally, do not enforce rules 
to the point of dismissal. Thus do those in authority lose a 
sure opportunity to frighten brutal men into at least a sem- 
blance of merciful behavior- Why employ brutal men at 
all? the reader may wonder. As well ask: why employ 
dishonest men as clerks and officers in banks. Evil forces 
must ever be reckoned with; therefore it is incumbent on 
those in authority to adopt a proper system of espionage, 
the enforcement of which will reduce evils to a minimum. 
There is scarcely a department of the Federal Government 
where just such a system is not now in operation. In busi- 
ness too — especially its more highly developed branches — 
"supervision" is a watchword. Surely, if the sane find it 
necessary to watch those whose work is carried on under the 
eyes of the sane, and in the sane world, is it ,not more neces- 



240 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

sary to watch those thousands whose work is done behind 
the locked doors of asylums? The first step in the enforce- 
ment of such a system would be a thorough understanding 
between the superintendent and attendants at the time the 
latter enter upon their duties. Instead of turning a new 
attendant over to the old attendants for training, as is so 
often done, those in authority should themselves assume 
the task of instruction. To be sure, a majority of our super- 
intendents to-day give words of advice to the newly-hired, 
but seldom do these preliminary admonitions carry weight. 
Those in authority should impress upon the mind of the 
novice the fact that his is a responsible position, and that 
he must discharge his duties humanely, or submit to sum- 
mary dismissal; and especially should male attendants be 
so instructed, for few men are wilHng to take the course of 
training which some of our hospitals now offer. Further- 
more, attendants — new and old — should be frankly in- 
formed that, from time to time, under the estabhshed system 
of espionage, personal representatives of the management 
(spies, if you like) will find their way into the several wards. 
These detectives may pose either as attendants or as patients 
and report to the superintendent. A consciousness of the 
presence of sane eyes will prove salutary. 

Who then will watch the superintendent who watches his 
subordinates? A fair question. Let the public watch and 
assist him through the instrumentality of a society, organized, 
of course, for the friendly purpose of co-operation and not 
with any avowed hostility toward hospital managements. No 
efiicient superintendent ever resents a close or even continued 
inspection of his institution. And no competent assistant 
physician or capable attendant would resent an espionage 
which is designed for the protection of the helpless. Such 
continued supervision, by eliminating the inefficient, would 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 241 

work to the advantage of the efficient men holding these 
positions, and would in a comparatively short time raise the 
standard of treatment to a humane level. 

If, also, attendants were made to realize that a dishonor- 
able discharge from one institution would forever bar them 
from all others, they would soon learn their lesson. A man 
about to be entrusted with the valuables of others is seldom 
employed by a commercial institution without a satisfactory 
certificate of character. Can we tolerate less care in the 
employing of men and women to whom such a valuable as 
a human soul is to be entrusted? Yet in a majority of our 
institutions to-day little care is exercised in the selection of 
help. Indeed, hospitals for the insane seldom have a full 
complement of attendants, and a random applicant stands 
an excellent chance of employment. Hundreds of these 
"unknowns" are now lording it over insane patients. 

It is true that so-called black-lists are kept by groups of 
hospitals in different sections of the country; yet these 
prove of little avail, inasmuch as an attendant discharged, 
say, by an institution in New England, can go immediately 
to another section — the Middle States, for instance — and 
usually secure a position. Indeed, by applying for a posi- 
tion under a false name and telling the requisite number of 
lies to complete the illusion of a new identity, these dis- 
charged attendants often secure positions in hospitals which 
maintain for their mutual protection one of these relatively 
ineffective black-lists. I know of instances of such failure on 
the part of the existing system. A National Society, at 
comparatively small expense, could establish and operate 
a country-wide black-list which would effectually eliminate 
undesirable workers from among the ranks of hospital 
employees. 

As a preliminary measure — and added protection — I 
17 



242 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

advocate a universal statute making it at least a misdemeanor 
for any man or woman, dishonorably discharged from one 
such institution, to accept a position in another; and like- 
wise a misdemeanor for any doctor in authority in a state or 
private hospital to employ as an attendant any man or woman 
whose references do not indicate a good record and some fit- 
ness for the work. A sworn statement on these points from 
each attendant, when engaged (together with his thumb-print, 
as a means of identification), would protect the doctors, and 
this statement, if untrue, would serve as a basis for crim- 
inal prosecution. The moral effect of such a statute would 
be such as to render its enforcement seldom necessary. Bru- 
tal and dishonest attendants would thus be forced into other 
lines of work, in which they might perhaps become useful 
members of society, or, at least, no longer a menace to soci- 
ety's defenceless portion. 



We must admit that the problem of securing efi&ciency 
among attendants is not an easy one. To make it easier 
several improvements must be made in the lot of the attend- 
ants themselves. For one thing, the niggardly salaries now 
offered make it extremely difficult for a management to secure 
or keep the right type. Competent men and women can 
earn two or three times as much in other and more con- 
genial lines of endeavor. The average scale of wages for 
attendants in hospitals for the insane ranges from sixteen 
to twenty-four dollars a month, with room and board. 
Women usually receive sixteen or eighteen dollars at the be- 
ginning; men from eighteen to twenty, though the rates vary 
throughout the coimtry. There is a slight margin, too, for an 
increase in salary, but even the exceptionally able attendants 
seldom receive more than thirty dollars a month. This 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 243 

bespeaks a false, a vicious economy. Not that the average 
attendant deserves a cent more than he receives; but would it 
not be wiser, more humane, and, in the end, cheaper, to offer 
inducements calculated to attract to this neglected field of 
service a higher type of character ? — nay, and keep him 
there, for nothing is more demoralizing than the constant 
changing that goes on in the ranks of the present attendants. 
To offer a wage of, say, forty, with a maximum of fifty 
dollars a month, including board and room, would, no 
doubt, be a move in the right direction. 

However, such a merely pecuniary inducement would 
nor, of itself, accomplish the purpose. Indeed, alone, it 
might defeat the purpose. For, after discussing this prob- 
lem with doctors who have employed attendants, I am 
brought to the conclusion that increased wages, unaccom- 
panied by increased and deserved privileges, and more whole- 
some and refined surroundings, would probably appeal only 
to burly workers in rougher fields. Wages high enough to 
attract a more refined type are, at the present stage of 
hospital development, out of the question; whereas privileges 
and refining influences might even now be brought to bear 
with excellent effect. Model dormitories, and separate cot- 
tages for married employees, instead of mere sleeping places, 
shorter and less exhausting hours, and proper places in 
which the extra leisure could be enjoyed — a library, billiard 
room, etc., — these would go farther than money toward the 
great task of refinement. It is unfair to keep an attendant 
on duty twelve or fifteen hours a day (these are now the 
common working hours) and for the balance of his time con- 
fine him to his ward under restrictions nearly as irksome as 
those to which the patients themselves must perforce submit. 
A few States, notably New York and Massachusetts, have 
granted appropriations for the creation of such conditions 



244 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

as I am describing. If these appropriations were enlarged, 
and if other States followed the same policy, it is safe to pre- 
dict that thousands of refined men and women would enter 
this field who are now debarred. And once in the work they 
should be offered the same chances for advancement as are 
offered to employees in any well conducted commercial es- 
tablishment. Such a policy, carried to its logical conclusion, 
would include also a system of pensions for those attendants 
who should devote the better part of their lives to this noble 
service. 

Still another effective means of eliminating brutality by 
the introduction of refining influences would consist in the 
wider employment of women nurses in men's wards. To 
the uninitiated this suggestion will no doubt seem ill-advised; 
yet, at this moment, there are in this country — and abroad, 
as well, — some hospitals for the insane where women nurses, 
assisted, of course, by orderlies, as are nurses in general 
hospitals, are managing men's wards with gratifying suc- 
cess.* What is needed is a general adoption of this humane 
practice. Not all classes of male patients can safely or 
advantageously be placed in charge of women nurses; but 
other classes — the more intelligent and less disturbed — 
comprising thousands, can, if anything, be managed better 
by women of capacity than by men of any sort. The supe- 
rior tact and quicker sympathy of women — God-given qual- 
ities — work wonders among insane men quite as readily as 
in the sane world. It cannot be denied that under the pres- 
ent regime women nurses in charge of troublesome women 
patients have not been entirely free from charges of cruelty; 
indeed, the contrary has been proved, as the results of inves- 
tigations show — but they are far less subject to this charge 

* See article on this subject by Dr. Charles P. Bancroft, in American 
Journal of Insanity, Vol. LXIII, No. 2, October, 1906. 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 245 

than men attendants. According to those superintendents 
who have successfully placed women nurses in charge of 
men's wards, thousands of male patients who now suffer at 
the hands of unfeeling and incompetent male attendants 
could be brought under remedial and uplifting influences 
simply by having women placed over them in positions of 
authority. And the salutary influence of women in wards 
where they are available would have a tendency, as ex- 
perience has demonstrated, to spread throughout all other 
wards where their immediate presence is impracticable or 
unsafe. It would therefore seem desirable to substitute 
female for male nurses wherever possible. 

Such a course, too, would further simplify the problem of 
securing an adequate number of attendants. The services 
of women are easier to secure, and women readily take up 
nursing as a profession — as a life-work; whereas men natu- 
rally look upon such work simply as a means of providing a 
livelihood until they can secure work more to their liking. 

There are in this country about twenty thousand men and 
women working as attendants in our asylums and hospitals 
for the insane. Of this number several thousand are, with- 
out doubt, individuals of refinement. Now, if a few thou- 
sand persons of refinement can work under such conditions 
as obtain so generally to-day in our hospitals and asylums, 
is it not reasonable to suppose that improved conditions 
would eventually attract a full complement of workers of 
the same type? Strange as it may seem, many attendants 
now so employed, enjoy their work and would not of their 
own choice relinquish it. And I make bold to appeal to 
those grinding thousands now eking out a livelihood in work 
apparently more attractive, but, in truth, less endurable, to 
seek improved conditions and increased usefulness in those 
hospitals where the application of the Golden Rule to insan- 



246 • A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

ity is now possible. In such places a feeling of security and 
interest soon overcomes the instinctive timidity or repugnance 
felt by many when, in the capacity of attendants, they 
first come in contact with the insane. Such contact, bar- 
ring exceptional cases influenced by a too impressionable 
temperament on the part of the nurse, renders one, as it were, 
immune. It would surprise (perhaps annoy) many sane 
persons, were they to realize how slightly many of the inmates 
of asylums differ from their more fortunate brothers at large. 
Yet among those who have been brought into close contact 
with the insane this is a trite observation; and it is the key to 
the problem which causes so many to wonder how and why 
it is that men and women, at liberty to choose their voca- 
tions, deliberately cast their lot with that portion of 
humanity which the average person seems so willing to 
shun. 



XXX 

But the problem of attendants is not the only pressing 
one. Any alienist will agree, that the cure of the insane 
depends upon their care, and that to this end a proper 
classification is necessary. This can be accomplished only 
when the curable cases can be given individual attention. 
The manifestations of insanity vary with the original tem- 
peraments of those afflicted. Collective treatment is now 
the rule; but not until individual treatment prevails will 
the ratio of recoveries begin to move toward that inspiring 
figure which due progress in the care of the insane must even- 
tually show. For the moment each patient receives the care 
which is his rightful portion, all abuses complained of will 
be doomed. Such care will kill cruelty at its source. 

In the general hospital there are wards set apart for the 
treatment of certain diseases. Does any one believe that 
twenty patients, ill with typhoid fever, should, for an indefi- 
nite period, be given the same kind of medicine and the same 
kind of food at the same hour each day? Such treatment 
would result in the death of many who, with individual 
treatment, would recover. Yet, in a single ward in a hos- 
pital for the insane, twenty, thirty, forty, sometimes sixty, 
sometimes more than sixty patients, each in a different state 
of physical and mental health, are forced to submit to a uni- 
form mode of living which, in a majority of cases, is not 
at all conducive to their well-being. In many instances 
this machme-like existence has been the death of patients 
who might have been restored to health had they been given 
exercise and diversion, and food of a quality and variety 

247 



248 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

calculated to tempt their jaded appetites.^ It is trite to ob- 
serve that mental health depends largely upon bodily health. 
Since this is so, hospital managements might think less of 
administering drugs, and what amounts to punishment, and 
more about providing a suitable diet, exercise, and proper 
application of what mind remains, for those whose condition 
so clearly demands these requisites of intelligent treatment. 
The total cost would be less. Instead of feeding and caring 
for, year in and year out, the once curable cases become 
chronic, the State might better spend more money for a 
shorter period, restore the sick to health, and convert a 
burden into a joy. 

There are doctors in our State Hospitals who will tell you 
that to treat certain cases on their merits will demoralize 
those patients whose condition is such that individual treat- 
ment seems unnecessary or hopeless. As most asylums are 
now conducted, the individual treatment of the few might 
arouse a feeling of discontent among those denied special 
privileges. But would any such demoralization ensue if each 
patient was treated with that consideration he so richly 
deserves ? I know that it would not. When one patient sees 
a fellow-patient allowed more liberty, or perhaps granted a 
more inviting diet than himself, it is not so much a feeling of 
jealousy or envy that seizes him — in his heart he is glad that 
some one of his kind is given pleasure. What he rebels 
against is the fact that he himself is denied, not special priv- 
ileges, but those ordinary benefits which in any hospital 
deserving of the name would be his without the asking. 

1 As chances of recovery never cease to exist, and as statistics show that 
twenty out of each hundred who recover, do so after one or more years of 
confinement, the standard of care for even the so-called chronic cases can 
never be lowered without robbing some patients of their rightful chance of 
rescue. Apparently hopeless cases which recover after ten, fifteen, or twenty 
years of absolute insanity are by no means rare, as can be proved by a 
study of hospital records. 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 249 

Another objection which the management of a state hos- 
pital sometimes makes to the plea for individual treatment 
is that under the law one patient is as deserving as another, 
and that the granting of privileges, favors, etc., to the com- 
paratively few curable cases cannot be accomplished with- 
out working an injustice to the many whose condition does 
not demand exceptional care. The glib way in which those 
in authority in a state hospital prate about justice would 
bring a smile to the face of the shy goddess who perhaps pre- 
sides over that virtue. These expounders of Equal Rights 
for All will refuse to alter a general and mechanical course 
of treatment which is admittedly crude and unproductive of 
good results ; yet these very men seem willing to discriminate 
between patients so long as the discrimination leads not to 
exceptional privileges but to exceptional privations. 

Though those in authority are deserving of considerable 
criticism there are many reasons why they should be treated 
with all charity. If we are to demand that doctors treat each 
patient as though he were the only one in the world, we 
must, through the several State Legislatures, provide funds 
for the proper equipment and manning of our institutions. 
To-day there are few institutions where the doctors in charge 
have not under their care a greater number of patients than 
can be properly treated. Nor are there many institutions 
regularly provided with an adequate corps of attendants. 
Indeed, if the United States Government were to send into 
an engagement a battleship as poorly manned as are our 
asylums, the people would rise in their indignation and de- 
mand that the honor of the Nation be given into other keep- 
ing. To my, perhaps prejudiced, mind, the honor of this 
Nation is open to attack so long as the States force, or 
permit, great institutions to proceed in their work with de- 
fective equipment or an inadequate complement of workers. 



XXXI 

But more fundamental than espionage, and more funda- 
mental than individual as opposed to collective treatment, 
is the need of a changed spiritual attitude toward the insane. 
They are still human : they love and hate, and have a sense 
of humor. The worst are usually responsive to kindness. 
In not a few cases their gratitude is livelier than that of nor- 
mal men and women. Any person who has worked among 
the insane, and done his duty by them, can testify to cases 
in point, and even casual observers have noted the fact that 
the insane are oftentimes appreciative. Consider the ex- 
perience of Thackeray, as related by himself in "Vanity 
Fair" (Chapter LVII). "I recollect," he writes, "seeing, 
years ago, at the prison for idiots and madmen, at Bic^tre, 
near Paris, a poor wretch bent down under the bondage of 
his imprisonment and his personal infirmity, to whom one 
of our party gave a halfpennyworth of snuff in a cornet or 
'screw' of paper. The kindness was too much for the poor 
epileptic creature. He cried in an anguish of delight and 
gratitude; if anybody gave you and me a thousand a year, 
or saved our lives, we could not be so affected." 

A striking exhibition of fine feeling on the part of an in- 
mate of an asylum was brought to my attention by an assist- 
ant physician whom I met while inspecting a certain State 
Hospital in Massachusetts. It seems that the patient in 
question — a woman — while at her worst had caused an 
endless amount of annoyance by indulging in mischievous 

250 



A MmD THAT FOUND ITSELF 251 

acts which seemed to verge on the malicious. Judged by 
her conduct at that time no observer would have credited 
her with the exquisite sensibility she so signally displayed 
when she had become convalescent and was granted a 
parole which permitted her to walk at will about the 
hospital grounds. After one of these walks, taken in 
the early spring, she rushed up to my informant and, with 
childlike simplicity, told him of the thrill of delight she 
had experienced in discovering the first flower of the year 
in full bloom — a dandelion, which, with characteristic 
audacity, had risked its life by braving the elements of an 
uncertain season. 

"Did you pick it?" asked the doctor. 

"I stooped to do so," said the patient; ''then I thought 
of the pleasure the sight of it had given me — so I left it, 
hoping that some one else would discover it and enjoy its 
beauty as I did." 

Thus it was that a woman, while still insane, unconsciously 
exhibited perhaps finer feeling than did Ruskin, Tennyson, 
and Patmore, on an occasion the occurrence of which is 
vouched for by Mr. Julian Hawthorne. These three masters, 
out for a walk one chilly afternoon in late autumn, discovered 
a belated violet bravely putting forth from the shelter of a 
mossy stone. Not until these worthies had got down on all 
fours and done ceremonious homage to the flower, did they 
resume their walk. Suddenly Ruskin halted, and, planting 
his cane in the ground, exclaimed, "I don't believe, Alfred, 
— Coventry, I don't believe that there are in all England 
three men besides ourselves who, after finding a violet at 
this time of year, would have had forbearance and fine feel- 
ing enough to refrain from plucking it." 

The reader may judge whether the imconscious display 
of feeling by the inmate of an asylum was not finer than 



252 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

the self-conscious raptures of these three wise men and 
sane. 



Is it not then an atrocious anomaly that the treatment 
often meted out to an insane person is the very treatment 
which would deprive a sane person of his normal capacity ? w^ 
"The victim must right his reason in an atmosphere of un- 
reason. He must check his own delusions with the delu- 
sions of others as mad as himself; and he must submit to a 
variety of abuses as cruel as they are unnecessary. That 
so many insane persons recover their reason under ad- 
verse conditions is pretty good proof that insanity, though 
prevalent, can never become preponderant. Miners who 
penetrate the mountain fastnesses frequently become men- 
tally unbalanced as a result of prolonged loneliness; and 
their knowledge that they imperil their reason by living 
in solitude, and their willingness to take the risk, are 
qualifications for the work. But one and all they hasten 
to return to civilization the moment they find themselves 
beginning to be slightly affected with hallucinations. Delay 
means death. Contact with sane people, if not tooj^g 
delayed, means an almost immediate restoration to npr- 
nmlity. This iT an illuminating fact. For, n contact 
with the sane world can restore the threatened reason of 
these miners, why cannot the minds of the inmates of 
our asylums be at least strengthened by contact with 
sound minds? Inasmuch as insane patients cannot be 
set free, it is the duty of those in authority to treat them 
with as great a degree of sane consideration as possible. 
Instead of discouraging and abusing those curable patients 
who exhibit flashes of sanity, why not, on the contrary, 
single them out and encourage them in the direction of right 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 253 

thinking ? In my own case I know that my degree of sanity 
varied with the sanity of the treatment accorded me. I can 
recall one wholesome interview which I had with my con- 
servator and a friend. It eliminated more insane notions 
from my mind than all the hours of talk I had previously 
had with doctors and attendants. These two men — my con- 
servator and my friend — in a spirit of tolerance and friend- 
liness pointed out the impracticability of some of my wild 
schemes, and their arguments were so convincing that I soon 
accepted them and saw the absurdity of my own delusions. 
Such arguments would of course be without effect at certain 
stages, but, during a period which seems to point toward nor- 
mality, friendly advice will without question hasten recovery. 
Not a few of the inmates of our asylums, if they enjoyed 
this individual and humane treatment, directed primarily 
toward their own interests, might to-day be set free. And 
many others not quite fit for absolute freedom might well be 
set free on parole. I firmly believe that the public should be 
protected against the insane, and the insane against them- 
selves; but I see no reason why society, which so little heeds 
its most unfortunate portion, is deserving of an excessive de- 
gree of protection at the expense of recovered patients who 
have already endured unnecessary suffering because of the 
public's neglect. Society would not be likely to suffer any 
more than it suffers already because of the continued free- 
dom of hundreds of so-called "queer" people who would 
have a poor chance of ever regaining their freedom were 
they once legally deprived of it. I do not mean to say that 
any considerable number of the present inmates of our asy- 
lums and hospitals have been illegally committed, or that they 
are wittingly held longer than seems necessary. But innocent 
men have been condemned and hanged, and it stands to 
reason that an undeterminable number of persons out of the 



,254 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

two hundred thousand mental incompetents in this country, 
have been unjustly and, in some cases, maliciously branded as 
insane when they did not deserve that infliction. So long 
as the human equation enters into the problem, such errors 
— or crimes — cannot possibly be completely guarded against. 
That the unwarranted commitment of a person to a hos- 
pital for the insane is a tragic miscarriage of justice, all will 
admit. It therefore follows that the holding of a patient for 
an unwarranted length of time after commitment is also an 
injustice — likewise tragic. Yet many patients are deprived 
of their liberty longer than necessary. This fact, however, 
is seldom the fault of the doctors in charge of them, except, 
perhaps, in private, run-for-gain institutions. As a rule 
public hospital officials are more than willing to discharge 
any patient fit for freedom — if for no other reason, to re- 
lieve the overcrowded condition which obtains in a majority 
of public institutions. It is the indifference — or even hos- 
tility — of a patient's relatives which most often forces an 
asylum management to hold him for weeks or months — 
sometimes years — after he has demonstrated his fitness for, 
at least, a large degree of freedom. Rather than force a 
J patient out into a world which, at best, is cold, the doctors 
^~ will detain him until he is truly able to shift for himself. Rel- 
atives, who are contributing to their own selfish comfort by 
leaving the care of their unfortunates to the State, should 
pause and try to view Hfe from behind asylum bars. 

So much for those luckless patients whose relatives or 
friends fail to do their whole duty by them. But what of 
those inmates — and there are hundreds of them discharged 
each year in this country — what of those who have no rel- 
atives or friends at all, either to help or to hinder them when 
their liberation is about to occur? In behalf of this class I 
wish to call attention to a work, only recently inaugurated in 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 255 

this country, though long since practiced abroad, which is 
deserving of support and of general adoption. I refer to 
the "After Care of the Insane." Thanks to the initiative 
of Miss Louisa Lee Schuyler of New York, the State Char- 
ities Aid Association of that city has brought to a working 
perfection several so-called " Afto;_Care_Committees.'' These 
are composed of earnest men and women who lend assist- 
ance to needy and friendless patients about to re-enter the 
sane world. Four hospitals in New York State are now 
provided with the co-operation of such committees, and be- 
fore a great while presumably every hospital for the insane 
in that State will be likewise provided. No institution of 
the character discussed should be without this provision, for 
it is just such outside assistance that is required, if all pa- 
tients deserving of discharge are to secure their freedom the 
moment they are ready for it. 

Realizing that my detailed account of abuses may disturb 
relatives and friends of the inmates of our hospitals for the 
insane, I feel it my duty to express again my belief that most 
insane persons are better off in an institution than out of one. 
Only a comparatively small, though undeterminable, pro- 
portion of the two hundred thousand inmates of our hospitals, 
asylums and sanatoriums are subjected to the worst of the 
abuses laid bare and discussed in this book. This is at least 
reassuring; for investigation and reform must soon remedy the 
evils complained of; and country- wide investigation, if it does 
nothing else, will protect insane patients against abuse as they 
never before have been protected. Then, before the wave 
of reform shall have lost its force, a National Society can take 
hold and help, or, if necessary, force all hospital manage- 
ments to maintain the highest attainable standard. Abuse 
and injustice will then become as myths; — and, at last, 
the insane will come into their own. 



PART III 



XXXII 

Such convictions as the foregoing — or some of them, and 
the germs of the rest — I carried with me into the world. 

For the first month of regained freedom I remained at 
home. These weeks were interesting. Scarcely a day 
passed that I did not meet several former friends and 
acquaintances who greeted me as one risen from the dead. 
And well they might, for my three-year trip among the 
worlds — rather than around the world — was suggestive 
of complete separation from the every-day life of the multi- 
tude. One profound impression which I received at this 
time was of the uniform delicacy of feeling exhibited by my 
well-wishers. In no instance that I can recall was a direct 
reference made to the nature of my recent illness, until I had 
first made some remark which indicated that I was not 
averse to discussing it. There was an evident effort on the 
part of friends and acquaintances to avoid a subject which 
they naturally supposed I wished to forget. Knowing that 
their studied avoidance of a delicate subject was inspired by 
a thoughtful consideration, rather than a lack of interest, I 
invariably forced the conversation along a line calculated to 
satisfy a suppressed but perfectly proper curiosity which I 
seldom failed to detect. My decision to stand on my past 
and look the future in the face has, I believe, contributed 
much to my own happiness, and, more than anything else, 
enabled my friends to view my past as I myself do. By 
frankly referring to my experiences I put my friends and 

256 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 257 

acquaintances at ease, and at a stroke rid them of that 
constraint which one must feel in the presence of a person 
constantly in danger of being hurt by a chance reference to 
an unhappy experience. 

I have said much about the obligation of the sane in refer- 
ence to easing the burdens of those committed to our asylums. 
I might say almost as much about the attitude of the public 
toward those who survive such a period of exile, restored, 
but branded with a suspicion which only time can efface. 
Though an ex-inmate of an asylum receives personal con- 
sideration, he finds it unduly difficult to obtain employment. 
No fair-minded man can find fault with this condition of 
affairs, for an inbred horror of insanity breeds distrust of one 
who has been insane. Nevertheless, this attitude is a mis- 
taken one. Perhaps one reason for this lack of confidence 
in an ex-inmate is to be found in the lack of confidence which 
such a person often feels in himself. Confidence begets 
confidence, and those men and women who survive mental 
illness should attack their problem as though their absence 
had been occasioned by any one of the many circumstances 
which may interrupt the career of a person whose mind has 
never been other than sound. I can testify to the efficacy 
of this course, for it is the one I pursued. And I think that 
I have thus far met with as great a degree of success as I 
might reasonably have expected to attain had my career 
never been all but fatally interrupted. 

Discharged from the asylum in September, 1903, late in 
October of that same year I went to New York. Primarily 
my purpose was to study art. I even went so far as to 
gather information regarding the several schools; and, had 
not my artistic ambition taken wing, I might have worked 
for recognition in a field where so many strive in vain. But 
my business instinct, revivified by the commercially sur- 
18 



258 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

charged atmosphere of New York, soon gained sway, and, 
within three months I had secured a position with the same 
firm for which I had worked when I first went to New York 
— six years earlier. It was by the merest chance that 
I made this most fortunate connection, which has continued 
ever since. By no stretch of my rather elastic imagination 
can I even now picture a situation that would, at one and 
the same time, have so perfectly afforded a means of liveli- 
hood, leisure in which to indulge my longing to write, and 
an opportunity to further my humanitarian projects. 

Though persons discharged from our asylums are usually 
able to secure, without much difficulty, work as unskilled 
laborers, or positions where the responsibility is slight, it is 
often next to impossible for them to secure positions of trust. 
That I did secure such a position naturally arouses within me 
a lively sense of gratitude toward the members of that firm 
which helped me to lift myself over as rough a spot on life's 
road as one may expect to fall upon. And what pleases me 
to-day, and pleased me then, is that the two men who com- 
prise the firm in question did not employ me solely because 
of a desire to help me when I so much needed help. Knowing 
my past, they yet engaged my services because they thought 
they saw in me certain qualifications for the proposed work. 
During the negotiations which led to the engagement I was 
in no suppliant mood. If anything, I was quite the reverse ; 
and, as I have since learned, I imposed terms with an assur- 
ance so sublime that any less degree of audacity would have 
put an end to the negotiations then and there. But the man 
with whom I was dealing was not only broad-minded, he 
was sagacious. He recognized immediately such an ability 
to take care of myself as argued an ability to protect the in- 
terests of the firm in the particular line of work he had in 
mind. But this alone would not have induced the average 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 259 

business man to employ me under the circumstances. It 
was the common-sense view of insanity on the part of my em- 
ployer which determined the issue. This view which is, 
indeed, exceptional to-day, will one day (within a few genera- 
tions, I beheve) be too commonplace to deserve special men- 
tion. As this man tersely expressed it: "When an employee 
is ill, he's ill, and it makes no difference to me whether he 
goes to a general hospital or an asylimi. Should you ever 
find yourself in need of treatment or rest I want you to feel 
that you can take it when and where you please, and work for 
us when you are able." When a majority of men attain to 
this advanced view, insanity will take its proper place with 
other ills which flesh is heir to. Of course, I do not deny 
that one employing an ex-inmate of an asylum must care- 
fully judge his capacity and assign him to work for which 
he is fitted. 

Strangely enough, that "missionary spirit" (if you will) 
which now impels me to try to spread the principles of Non- 
Restraint has been nurtured and strengthened by the daily 
discharge of those business obligations which (if I may be 
pardoned) I shall now briefly describe. What my employers 
asked me to do was to introduce over a large territory a cer- 
tain business principle, which, if universally adopted, would 
revolutionize a great industry. For three years I have gone 
from State to State — from Maine to New Mexico — pre- 
senting and explaining a special form of contract under 
which, for an agreed amoimt and without "extras," certain 
types of buildings may be erected, from plans to completion, 
and delivered to the purchaser, ready for occupancy. The 
purchaser, or owner, deals directly with but one firm, which 
acts as owner pro tern, and guarantees a satisfactory result. 
Those who have erected buildings under the usual method, 
namely, that of placing the entire operation in the hands of 



26o A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

an architect, who in turn, in the name of the owner, lets 
out the work to several contractors for competitive bidding, 
will at once grasp the significance of this revolutionizing 
method. 

The presentation of so unique a contract requires a degree 
of persuasiveness and audacity. Though I have not met 
with an unusual degree of success, I have secured a sufficient 
nimiber of contracts to warrant my being kept on the Hst 
of employees of the firm which had the courage to send me 
abroad in the land as its representative. My business mis- 
sionary work has been done among bankers in three hundred 
cities and towns. Contact with two or three thousand such 
men in the North, East, South, and Southwest has, in every 
way, been beneficial to me. Not only have I talked with 
them. I have talked "at" them, endeavoring to convert them 
from an old and imsatisfactory method to a new and prac- 
tical one. Many a time have I smiled inwardly when I 
found myself thus addressing a Board of Directors, or 
Building Committee, about to let a contract for a new 
building or the remodeling of an old banking room. 
For, at such times my memory invariably presents two 
pictures of similar (but how different !) scenes — one, that 
of my appearance before a clinic of Yale medical stu- 
dents, held at the State Hospital while I was possessed of 
a remarkably complete collection of delusions of grandeur 
which I willingly, yes, eagerly, laid on the Altar of Science. 
The other, that in which I appeared before the Medical Staff 
at the same hospital, prior to my discharge. These 
two occasions marked my first attempts at speech-making. 
My next talk of sufficient length to be called a speech was 
delivered before a Board of Directors. After listening to me 
they signed a contract for a sixty-thousand-dollar building. 
Aside from the preliminary nerve-racking hiatus which invari- 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 261 

ably precedes a speech, I found it easy to monopolize the 
attention of my listeners. It would seem, therefore, that the 
training I received in an institution not commonly classed as 
one of learning proved to be of decided utility. 

Dealing almost exclusively with bankers — those hard- 
worked men of seemingly easy hours — I have enjoyed al- 
most as much leisure for reading and trying to learn how to 
write as I should have enjoyed had I had an assured income 
that would have enabled me to devote my entire time to 
these pursuits. And so congenial has my work proved, and 
so many places of interest have I visited, that I might rather 
be classed as a "commercial tourist" than as a commercial 
traveler. To view almost all of the natural wonders and 
places of historic interest east of the Mississippi — and many 
west of it; to meet and know representative men and 
women; to enjoy an almost uninterrupted leisure, and, at 
the same time, earn a livelihood — these advantages bear me 
out in the feeling that in securing the position I did, at the 
time I did, I enjoyed one of those rare compensations which 
Fate sometimes bestows upon those who survive unusual 
adversity. 



XXXIII 

When I regained my liberty (September, 1903) I real- 
ized that I could not successfully advocate reforms in hos- 
pital management until I had first proved to relatives and 
friends my ability to earn a living. And I knew that, after 
securing a position in the business world, I must first satisfy 
my employers before I could hope to persuade others to join 
me in prosecuting the reforms I had at heart. Consequently 
during the first year of my renewed business activity (the 
year 1904) I held my humanitarian project in abeyance and 
gave all my executive energy to my business duties. During 
the first half of that year I gave but little time to reading and 
writing, and none at all to drawing. In a tentative way, 
however, I did occasionally discuss my project with intimate 
friends; but I spoke of its consummation as a thing of the 
uncertain future. At that time, though confident of accom- 
plishing my set purpose, I believed I should be fortunate if 
my projected book were published before my fortieth year. 
That I am able to publish it eight years earlier is due to one 
of those unlooked for combination of circumstances which 
sometimes causes a hurried change of plans. 

The events of November and December 1904, and Jan- 
uary, 1905, must be mentioned, and then I shall have told 
the reader about most of my personal fortunes. Late in the 
fall of 1904, a slight illness detained me for two weeks, 
in a city several hundred miles from home. The illness itself 
amounted to little, and, so far as I know, had no direct bear- 
ing on later results, except that in giving me an enforced vaca- 

262 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 263 

tion it aflForded me an opportunity to read several of the 
world's great books — books which people are prone to 
reserve until a period of leisure reminds them of their for- 
mer neglect. 

One of these was "Les Miserables." It made so deep an 
impression on me that I am inclined to believe it started a 
train of thought which gradually grew into a purpose so all- 
absorbing that I might have been overwhelmed by it, had 
not my over-active imagination been brought to bay by 
another's conmion sense. Hugo's plea for suffering Human- 
ity — for the world's miserable — struck a responsive chord 
within me. Not only did it revive my latent desire to help 
the afflicted; it did more. It aroused a consuming desire 
to emulate Hugo himself, by writing a book which should 
arouse sympathy for and interest in that class of unfortu- 
nates in whose behalf I felt it my peculiar right and duty to 
speak. I question whether any one ever read "Les Mis^- 
erables" with intenser interest or feeling. I read the entire 
work within a few days. By day I read the story imtil my 
head ached; by night I dreamed of it. Then and there I 
resolved that I should lose no time in the beginning of my 
own work. 

To resolve to write a book is one thing; to write it — 
fortunately for the public — is quite another. Though I 
wrote letters with ease, I soon discovered that I knew 
nothing of the vigils or methods of writing a book. Even 
then I did not attempt to predict just when I should begin to 
commit my story to paper. But, a month later, a member 
of the firm made a remark which acted as a sudden spur. 
One day, while discussing the business situation with me, he 
informed me that my work had convinced him that he had 
made no mistake in engaging me when he did. Naturally I 
was pleased. I had vindicated sooner than I had hoped his 



264 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

judgment in selecting me for a unique work. Aside from 
appreciating and remembering his compliment, at the time 
I paid no more attention to it. Not until two weeks later 
did the force of his remark exert any peculiar influence on 
my plans. During those weeks it apparently penetrated 
to some subconscious part of me — a part which, on prior 
occasions, had assumed such authority as to dominate my 
whole being. But, in this instance, the part that became 
dominant did not exert an imruly or even unwelcome influ- 
ence. Full of interest in my business affairs one week, the 
next I not only had no interest in them, but I had begun even 
to dislike them. From a matter-of-fact man of business I 
was transformed into a man whose one thought was the 
amelioration of suffering among the afflicted insane. Travel- 
ing on this high plane of ideal humanitarianism I could get 
none but a distorted and dissatisfying view of the life I must 
lead if I should continue to devote my time to the compara- 
tively deadening routine of commercial affairs. Thus it 
was inevitable that I should focus my attention on my human- 
itarian project. During the last week of December I sought 
ammunition by making a visit to the two institutions where 
I had once been confined as an incompetent. I went there 
to discuss certain phases of the subject of reform with the 
doctors in authority. I was politely received and listened 
to with a degree of deference which was, indeed, satisfying. 
Though I realized that I was rather intense on the subject 
of reform I did not have that clear insight into my state of 
mind which the doctors had. Indeed, I believe that only 
those expert in the detection of symptoms of a slightly 
disturbed mental condition could possibly have observed 
anything abnormal about me at that time. Only when I dis- 
cussed my fond project of reform did I betray an abnormal 
stress of feeling. I could talk as convincingly about business 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 265 

as I had at any time in my life; for, even at the height of 
this "wave of enthusiasm," I dealt at length with a certain 
banker who finally placed with my employers a large con- 
tract. 
After conferring with the doctors, or rather — as it proved 

— exhibiting myself to them, I returned to New Haven and 
discussed my project with the president of Yale University. 
He listened patiently — he could scarcely do otherwise — 
and did me the great favor of interposing his judgment at a 
time when I might have made a false move. I told him that 
I intended to visit Washington at once, and enlist the aid of 
the President; also that of the Secretary of State, Hon. John 
Hay, who was then alive. Dr. Hadley tactfully dissuaded me. 
He advised me not to approach these two gentlemen until I 
had more thoroughly crystallized my ideas and committed 
them to paper. His wise suggestion I had the wisdom to 
adopt. 

The next day I went to New York, and on January ist, 1905, 
I began to write. Within two days I had written about fif- 
teen thousand words — for the most part on the subject of 
reforms and how to effect them. By way of mental diver- 
sion I wrote personal letters to intimate friends. One of 
these produced a result unlooked for. It was so well writ- 
ten that its recipient jumped at the conclusion that I had 
again lost my poise. There were about it compromising ear- 
marks which he recognized, I intimated that I was about to 
approach a certain man of wealth and influence in New York, 
with a view to securing some action that would lead to reform. 
That was enough. My friend showed the letter to my brother 

— the one who had acted as my conservator. Upon reading it 
he knew at once that I was in an excited mental condition. 
But he could not very well judge the degree of the excite- 
ment; for when I had last talked with him — a week earlier 



266 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

— I had not discussed my large plans. Business affairs 
and my hope for business advancement had then alone 
interested me. 

I talked with President Hadley on Friday; Saturday I 
went to New York; Sunday and Monday I spent at the 
Yale Club, writing; Tuesday, this tell-tale letter fell under 
the prescient eye of my brother. That day, Tuesday, he at 
once got in touch with me by telephone. We briefly dis- 
cussed the situation. He did not intimate that he believed 
me to be in elation. He simply urged me not to attempt to 
interest any one in my project until I had first returned to 
New Haven and discussed it with him. Now I had already 
gone so far as to invite the members of the firm to dine with 
me that very night at the Yale Club, for the purpose of in- 
forming them of my plans. This I did, beHeving it to be only 
fair that they should know what I intended to do, so that 
they might dispense with my services should they feel that 
my plans would in any way impair my usefulness as an 
employee. Of this dinner engagement, therefore, I told my 
brother. But, so insistently did he urge me to defer any 
such conference as I proposed until I had talked with him 
that, although it was too late to break the dinner engage- 
ment, I agreed to avoid, if possible, all reference to my 
project. With that qualified but well-meant promise, and 
the promise to return home the next day, our telephone 
conference ended. 

That night my guests honored me as agreed. For an 
hour or two we discussed business conditions and affairs in 
general. Then, one of them referred pointedly to my im- 
plied promise to unburden myself on a certain subject, the 
nature of which he did not, at the time, know. I immediately 
decided that it would be best to "take the bull by the horns," 
submit my plans, and, if necessary, sever my connection 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 267 

with the firm, should its members force me to choose (as I 
put it) between themselves and Humanity. I then pro- 
ceeded to unfold my scheme; and, though I may have ex- 
hibited a decided intensity of feeling during my discourse, 
at no time, I believe, did I overstep the bounds of what 
appeared to be sane enthusiasm. My employers agreed that 
my purpose was commendable, — that, no doubt I could and 
would eventually be able to do much for those I had left be- 
hind in a durance I so well knew to be vile. Their one warn- 
ing was that I seemed in too great a hurry. They called 
my attention to the fact that I had not been long enough 
re-established in business to approach successfully and per- 
suade men of wealth and influence to take hold of my pro- 
ject. And one of my guests very aptly observed that I could 
not afford to be a philanthropist, which objection I met by 
saying that all I intended to do was to supply ideas for those 
able to apply them. The conference ended satisfactorily. 
My employers disclaimed any personal objection to my pro- 
ceeding with my project if I would, and yet remaining in 
their employ. They simply urged me to "go slow." "Wait 
until you're forty," said one. I then thought that I might 
do so. And perhaps I should have waited so long had not 
the next two days put me on the right road to an earlier 
inauguration of my cherished plans. 

The next day, January 4th, true to my word, I went home. 
That night I had a long talk with my brother. I did not 
suspect that a man like myself, capable of dealing with 
bankers and talking for several consecutive hours with his 
employers without arousing their suspicion as to his mental 
integrity, was to be suspected by his own relatives. Nor, 
indeed, with the exception of my brother who had read my 
suspiciously excellent letter, were any of my relatives dis- 
turbed, — and he did nothing to disabuse my assurance. 



268 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

After our night conference he left for his own home, 
casually mentioning that he would talk with me again the 
next morning. That pleased me, for I was in a talkative 
mood and craved an interested listener. 

When my brother returned the next morning I willingly 
accepted his invitation to go with him to his office where 
we could talk without fear of interruption. Arrived there, 
I calmly sat down and prepared to prove my whole case. I 
had scarcely ''opened fire" when in walked a stranger — a 
strapping fellow, to whom my brother immediately intro- 
duced me. I instinctively felt that it was by no mere 
chance that this third party had so suddenly appeared. 
My eye at once lighted on the dark blue trousers worn by 
the otherwise conventionally dressed stranger. That was 
enough. The situation became so clear that the explana- 
tions which followed were superfluous. In a word, I was 
under arrest, or in imminent danger of being arrested. To 
say that I was not in the least disconcerted would scarcely 
be true, for I had not divined my brother's clever purpose 
in luring me to his office. But I can say, with truth, that I 
was the coolest person in the room. I knew what I should 
do next, but my brother and the officer of the law could only 
guess. The fact is I did nothing. I calmly remained seated, 
awaiting the verdict which I well knew my brother, with 
characteristic decision, had prepared. With considerable 
effort — for the situation, he has since told me, was the most 
trying one of his life — he informed me that on the preceding 
day he had talked with the doctors to whom I had so thought- 
fully exhibited myself a week earlier. All agreed that 
I was in a state of elation which might or might not 
become more pronounced. They had advised that I be 
persuaded to submit voluntarily to restraint and treatment, 
or that I be forcibly committed. On this advice my brother 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 269 

had proceeded to act. And it was well so; for, though I 
appreciated the fact that I was by no means in a normal state 
of mind, I had not a clear enough insight into my condition 
to realize that treatment under a certain amount of restraint 
was what I needed — and that continued freedom might 
further inflame an imagination already overwrought. 

A few simple statements by my brother convinced me that 
it was for my own good and the peace of mind of my rela- 
tives that I should temporarily surrender my freedom. This 
I agreed to do. Perhaps the presence of two hundred pounds 
of brawn and muscle, representing the law, lent persuasive- 
ness to my brother's words. In fact, I did assent the more 
readily because I admired the thorough, sane, fair, almost 
artistic manner in which my brother had brought me to bay. 
I am inclined to believe that, had I suspected that a re- com- 
mitment was imminent, I should have fled to a neighboring 
State during the preceding night. The reader should not, 
however, imagine that I was treated with any unnecessary 
severity. The right thing in the right way was done at the 
right time. Though up to this moment I had been the sub- 
ject of strategy, not for one moment thereafter, in any par- 
ticular, was I deceived. I was frankly told that several 
doctors had pronounced me elated, and that for my own 
good I must submit to treatment. I was allowed to choose 
between a Probate Court commitment which would have 
"admitted me" (humorous phrase) to the State Hos- 
pital, or a "voluntary commitment" (somewhat humor- 
ous phrase) which would enable me to enter the large 
private hospital where I had previously passed from de- 
pression to elation, and had later suffered tortures. I 
naturally chose the more desirable of the two disguised 
blessings, and agreed to start at once for the private hospital. 
It was not that I feared again to enter the State Hospital, — 



270 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

I wished to avoid the publicity which necessarily would have 
attended my commitment to that institution. Then, too, 
there were certain privileges which I knew I could not 
enjoy at the State Hospital, where doctors fear or refuse to 
treat each case on its own merits. Having re-established 
myself in society and business I did not wish to forfeit that 
advantage; and as the doctors believed that my period of 
elation would be short, it would have been sheer folly to 
advertise the fact that my mental integrity had again fallen 
under suspicion. 

But before starting for the asylum I imposed certain con- 
ditions. One was that the man with authoritative trousers 
should walk behind us at such a distance that no friend or 
acquaintance who might see us would divine that I was 
imder guard; the other was that the doctors at the institu- 
tion should agree to grant my every request, no matter how 
trivial, so long as it could in no way work to my own injury. 
My privileges were to include that of reading and writing 
to my heart's content, and the procuring of such books and 
supplies as my fancy might dictate. All this was agreed to. 
In return I agreed to submit to the surveillance of an attend- 
ant when I went about the city. This I knew would con- 
tribute to the peace of mind of my relatives, who naturally 
could not rid themselves of the fear that one so nearly sane 
as myself might take it into his head to leave the State and 
resist further attempts at incarceration. As I felt that I 
could easily elude my keeper, should I care to escape, his 
presence also contributed to my peace of mind, for I argued 
that the ability to outwit my guard would atone for the 
offense itself. 

I then started for the hospital; and I went with a willing- 
ness surprising even to myself. A cheerful philosophy en- 
abled me to turn an apparently disagreeable situation into 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 271 

one that was positively pleasing to me. I convinced myself 
that I could extract more real enjoyment from life during 
the ensuing weeks within the walls of a "retreat" than I 
could in the world outside. My one desire was to write, 
write, write. My fingers itched for a pen. My desire to 
write was, I imagine, as irresistible as the desire of a drunk- 
ard for his dram. And the act of writing resulted in an 
intoxicating pleasure composed of a mingling of emotions 
that defies analysis. 

That I should so calmly, almost eagerly, enter where 
devils might fear to tread, may surprise the reader who 
already has been informed of the cruel treatment I had for- 
merly received there. I feared nothing for I knew all. Hav- 
ing seen the worst, I knew how to avoid the pitfalls into 
which, during my first confinement, I had fallen or delib- 
erately walked. I was confident that I should suffer no 
abuse or injustice so long as the doctors in charge should live 
up to their agreement and treat me as a gentleman. This 
they did, and my quick recovery and subsequent discharge 
may be attributed mainly to this cause. The assistant 
physicians who had come in contact with me during my first 
experience in this hospital were no longer in charge. They 
had resigned some months earher — shortly after the death 
of the former superintendent. Thus it was that I started 
with a clean record, free from those prejudices which so 
often bias the judgment of a doctor who has treated a 
patient at his worst. 



XXXIV 

On more than one occasion my chameleon-like tempera- 
ment has enabled me to adjust myself to new conditions, 
but never has it served me better than it did at the time 
of which I write. A free man on New Year's Day, enjoying 
the pleasures of a congenial club-life, four days later I found 
myself again under the lock and key of an asylum for the 
insane. Never had I enjoyed life in New York more than 
during those first days of that new year. To suffer so rude 
a change was, indeed, enough to inspire a feeling of discon- 
tent, if not despair; yet, aside from the momentary initial 
shock, my contentment was in no degree diminished. I 
can say with truth that I was as complacent the very moment 
I re-crossed the threshold of that "retreat" as I had been 
when crossing and recrossing at will the threshold of my club. 

Of everything I thought and did during the interesting 
weeks which followed I have a complete record. The mo- 
ment I accepted the inevitable, I determined to spend my 
time to good advantage. Knowing from experience that I 
must observe my own case, if I was to have any record of 
it, I provided myself in advance with note-books. In these, 
from day to day, I recorded, I might almost say, my 
every action, and every thought and fancy. The sane part 
of me, which fortunately was dominant, subjected its tem- 
porarily insane and unruly part to a sort of scientific scru- 
tiny and surveillance. From morning till night I dogged 
the steps of my restless body and my more restless imagina- 
tion. I observed the physical and mental symptoms which 

272 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 273 

I knew were characteristic of elation. An exquisite light- 
heartedness, a slight ringing in the ears, the varying dilation 
of the pupils of the eyes, my pulse, my weight, my appetite 
— all these I observed and recorded with a care that would 
have put to blush a majority of the doctors now working 
among the insane. 

But this record of symptoms, though minute, is vague 
compared to my reckless analysis of my emotions. With a 
lack of reserve characteristic of my sublime mood, I described 
the joy of living, which, for the most part, then consisted of 
the joy of writing. And, even now, as I re-read my record, 
I feel that I cannot overstate the pleasure I found in sur- 
rendering myself completely to that controlling impulse. 
The excellence of my composition seemed to me beyond crit- 
icism. And as, to one in a state of elation, things are pretty 
much as they seem, I was able to experience the subtle de- 
lights which, I fancy, thrill the soul of a master. During 
this month of elation I wrote words enough to fill a book 
nearly as large as this one. Having found that each filling 
of my fountain pen was sufficient for the writing of about 
twenty-eight hundred words, I kept a record of the number 
of times I filled it. This minute calculation I carried to an 
extreme. If I wrote for fifty-nine minutes, and then read for 
seventeen, that fact I recorded. Thus, in my diary and out 
of it, I wrote and wrote, until the tips of my thumb and 
forefinger grew numb. As this numbness increased, and 
general weariness of the hand set in, there came a gradual 
flagging of my creative impulse, until a very sane unproductiv- 
ity supervened. Thus I had and have now a safe mental 
barometer and can judge my degree of normality — for no 
one is absolutely normal — by the intensity of my desire to 
write. This is fortunate-; for surely he who can detect 
an abnormal impulse in so innocent a manner, and correct 
19 



274 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

it when discovered, simply by writing it to sleep, is not likely 
to experience more trouble in this world than he whose in- 
evitable ills present themselves in more conventional and 
usually painful ways. 

The reader may well wonder in what my so-called insan- 
ity at this time consisted. Had I any of those impracticable 
delusions which had characterized my former period of 
elation? No, not one — unless an unreasonable haste to 
achieve my ambitions may be counted a delusion. My at- 
tention simply focused itself on my project. All other 
considerations seemed of little moment. My interest in 
business waned to the vanishing point. Yet, one thing 
should be noted : I did deliberately devote many hours to the 
consideration of business affairs. ReaHzing that one way 
to overcome an absorbing impulse is to divide the attention, 
I wrote a brief of the arguments I had so often presented to 
bankers. In this way I was able to convince the doctors 
that my intense interest in literature and reform would soon 
spend itself. » 

A consuming desire to effect reforms had been the deter- 
mining factor when I calmly weighed the situation with a 
view to making the best possible use of my impulse to write. 
The events of the immediate past had convinced me that I 
could not hope to interest men of wealth and influence in 
my humanitarian project until I had some definite plan to 
submit for their leisurely consideration. Further, I had 
discovered that an attempt to approach these men directly 
disturbed my relatives and friends who had not yet learned 
to dissociate present intentions from past performances. I 
had, therefore, determined to drill myself in the art of com- 
position to the end that I might write a story of my life 
which would merit publication. I felt that such a book, 
once written, would do its own work, regardless of my subse- 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 275 

quent fortunes. Other books had spoken even from the 
grave; why should not my book so speak — if necessary? 

With this thought in mind I began not only to read and 
write, but to test my impulse in order that I might discover 
if it were a genuine part of my being, an abnormal impulse, 
or a mere whim. I reasoned that to compare my own feel- 
ings toward and for literature, and my emotions experi- 
enced in the heat of composition, with the recorded feelings 
of successful men of letters, would give me a clue to the truth 
on this question. At this time I read several books of a 
nature that would have served as a basis for my deductions, 
but only one of them did I have time to analyze and note in 
my diary. That one was "Wit and Wisdom of the Earl of 
Beaconsfield." The following passages from the pen of 
Disraeli I transcribed in my diary with occasional comments. 

"Remember who you are, and also that it is your duty to 
excel. Providence has given you a great lot. Think ever 
that you are born to perform great duties." This I inter- 
preted in much the same spirit that I had interpreted the 
forty-fifth Psalm on a prior occasion. 

"It was that noble ambition, the highest and best, that 
must be born in the heart, and organized in the brain, which 
will not let a man be content unless his intellectual power is 
recognized by his race, and desires that it should contribute 
to their welfare." 

"Authors — the creators of opinion." 

"What appear to be calamities are often the sources of 
fortune." 

" Change is inevitable in a progressive country. Change 
is constant." ("Then why," was my recorded comment, 
" cannot the changes I propose to bring about, be brought 
about ? " 

" The author is, as we must ever remember, of peculiar 



276 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

organization. He is a being born with a predisposition 
which with him is irresistible, the bent of which he cannot 
in any way avoid, whether it directs him to the abstruse 
researches of erudition or induces him to mount into the 
fervid and turbulent atmosphere of imagination," "This," 
I wrote (and I wrote it the day after arriving at the hospital) 
"is a fair diagnosis of my case as it stands to-day, assuming, 
of course, that an author is one who loves to write, and can 
write with ease, even though what he says may have no lit- 
erary value. My past proves that my organization is a pecul- 
iar one. I have for years (two and a half) had a desire to 
achieve success along literary lines. I believe that, feeling 
as I do to-day, nothing can prevent my writing. If I had 
to make a choice at once between a sure success in the busi- 
ness career ahead of me, and doubtful success in the field of 
literature I would willingly, yes confidently, choose the latter. 
I have read many a time about successful writers who learned 
how to write, and by dint of hard work ground out their 
ideas. If these men could succeed, why should not a man 
who is in danger of being ground up by an excess of ideas and 
imagination succeed, when he seems able to put those ideas 
into fairly intelligible English ? He should and will succeed." 
Therefore, without delay, I began the course of experi- 
ment and practice which culminated within a few months 
in the first draft of my story. Wise enough to realize 
the advantages of a situation free from the annoying 
interruptions of the work-a-day world, I enjoyed a degree 
of liberty seldom enjoyed by those in possession of complete 
legal liberty and its attendant obligations. When I wished 
to read, write, talk, walk, sleep, or eat, I did the thing I 
wished. I went to the theater when the spirit moved me to 
do so, accompanied, of course, by an attendant, who, on 
such occasions, played the role of chum. 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 277 

Friends called to see me, and at their own, or my 
suggestion, I was invited for dinner outside the walls of my 
"cloister." At one of these dinners an incident occurred 
which throws a clear light on my condition at the time. The 
friend, whose willing prisoner I was, had invited a common 
friend to join the party. The latter had not heard of my 
re-commitment. At my suggestion, he who shared my 
secret had agreed not to refer to my situation unless I first 
broached the subject. There was nothing strange in the 
fact that we three should meet. Just such impromptu cel- 
ebrations had before occurred among us. We dined, and, 
as friends will, indulged in that exchange of thoughts which 
bespeaks intimacy. After hours of delectable communion I 
so shaped the conversation that a consideration of my 
past experiences and the possibility of their recurrence fol- 
lowed. The uninformed friend derided the idea. 

"Then, if I were to tell you," said I, "that I am at this 
moment supposedly insane — at least not normal — and 
that when I leave you to-night I shall go direct to the very 
hospital where I was formerly confined, there to remain until 
the doctors pronounce me fit for freedom, what should you 
say?" 

"I should say that you are a choice sort of liar," he re- 
torted. 

This genial insult I swallowed with gratification. It was, 
in truth, a timely and encouraging compliment, the force of 
which its giver failed to appreciate until my host had corrob- 
orated my statements. 

If I could so favorably impress an intimate friend at a 
time when I was elated, it is not surprising that I should 
subsequently hold an interview with a comparative stranger 
— the cashier of a local bank — without betraying my con- 
dition. As business interviews go, this was in a class by 



278 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

itself. While my attendant stood guard at the door, 1, a 
registered inmate of an asylum, entered the banking room 
and talked with a level-headed banker. And that inter- 
view was not without effect in subsequent negotiations 
which led to the closing of a contract amounting to one 
hundred and fifty thousand dollars. 

The very day I re-entered the hospital I stopped on the 
way at a local hotel and prociu"ed some of the hostelry's 
stationery. By using this in the writing of personal and 
business letters I managed to conceal my condition and my 
whereabouts from all except near relatives, and a few inti- 
mate friends who shared the secret. I quite enjoyed lead- 
ing this legitimate double-life. The situation appealed (not 
in vain) to my sense of humor. Many a sly laugh did I in- 
dulge in when I closed a letter with such ambiguous phrases 
as the following: "Matters of importance necessitate my re- 
maining where I am for an indefinite period." . . . "A 
situation has recently arisen which will delay my intended 
trip South. As soon as I have closed a certain contract 
[having in mind my contract to re-establish my sanity] I shall 
again take to the road." ... To this day few friends or 
acquaintances know that I was in semi-exile during the 
month of January, 1905. My desire to suppress the fact 
was not due, as already intimated, to any sensitiveness regard- 
ing the subject of insanity. What afterwards justified my 
course was that on regaining my freedom I was able, with- 
out embarrassment, again to take up my work. Within a 
month of my voluntary commitment, that is, in February, 
I started on business for the Central West and South where I 
remained until the following July. During those months 
I felt perfectly well, and have remained in excellent health 
ever since. 

This second and last hospital experience was most for- 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 279 

tunate. It came at a time and in a manner to furnish me 
with strong arguments wherewith to support my con- 
tention that madmen are too often man-made, and that 
he who is potentially a madman may keep a saving grip on 
his own reason if he be fortunate enough to receive that 
kindly and intelligent treatment to which one on the brink 
of chaos is of right entitled. Though during this second 
period of elation I was never in a mood so reckless as that 
which obtained immediately after my recovery from depres- 
sion in August, 1902, I was at least so excitable that, had 
those in authority attempted to impose upon me, I should 
have thrown discretion to the winds. To them, indeed, I 
frankly reiterated a terse dictum which I had coined during 
my first period of elation. " Just press the button of Injus- 
tice," said I, "and I'll do the rest!" This I meant, for 
fear of punishment does not restrain a man in the dare- 
devil grip of elation. 

What fostered my self-control was a sense of gratitude. 
The doctors and attendants treated me as a gentleman. 
Therefore it was not difficult to prove myself one. But, had 
they for one moment treated me as a criminal, or a dumb 
brute, I should have resented their action as vigorously as I 
had the action of their predecessors upon prior occasions. 
Instead of regaining my normal poise and securing a com- 
plete freedom within a month, in all probability I should 
have gone from bad to worse, lashing myself into a justifiable 
fury that undoubtedly would have necessitated my being 
confined for perhaps an indefinite period. Fortunately, 
my case was treated on its merits. I was given individual 
treatment. My every whim was at least considered with 
a politeness which enabled me to accept a denial with 
a highly sane equanimity. Aside from mild tonics I 
took no other medicine than that most beneficial sort which 



28o A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

inheres in kindness. The feeling that, though a prisoner, I 
could still command obligations from others, led me to rec- 
ognize my own reciprocal obligations, and was a constant 
source of delight. The doctors, by proving their title to that 
confidence which I tentatively gave them upon re-entering 
the institution, had no difficulty in convincing me that a 
temporary curtailment of privileges was for my own good. 
They all evinced a consistent desire to trust me. In return 
I trusted them. Nothing so well illustrates my proper 
treatment, day in and day out, as the fact that I cannot now 
recall a single denial of a request. Though not a few of my 
requests were denied, my confidence, at the time, that the 
denials were fair, has obscured the remembrance of them. 
My case was a mild one; but I should have fought my way 
again to freedom had I been met with that curt unreasonable- 
ness which characterized the attitude of the doctor who had 
charge of me during my first period of confinement in 
this hospital. Doctors and attendants who think it a thank- 
less task to attempt to gain the confidence and good- will of 
a patient at the beginning of his confinement will do well to 
ponder the contrast afforded by my actions during my first 
and my last period of elation; and especially should they 
remember that psychiatrists of wide experience and the 
highest standing afi&rm that an elated or maniacal condition 
is inevitably aggravated by unsound and tactless treatment. 
Indeed, one authority with whom I discussed this point 
went so far as to say that whether an elated patient shall 
become a madman — and potential enemy — or a fairly 
obedient and interesting friend depends, in a majority of 
cases, upon the capacity and attitude of the persons in 
charge of him. This significant fact granted, are not the 
hospital authorities largely responsible for the perpetuation 
of the dread of institutions wherein the insane are confined, 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 281 

and will not this dread be kept alive until the thousands of 
recoverable cases treated each year are so intelligently 
cared for that, upon discharge, "ex-inmates" may sgeak 
well, rather than ill, of an institution and the men li^ 
authority ? 



XXXV 

On leaving the hospital and resuming my travels, I felt 
sure that any one of several magazines or newspapers would 
willingly have had me conduct my campaign under its ner- 
vously commercial auspices; but a flash-in- the-pan method 
did not appeal to me. Those noxious growths, Incompe- 
tence, Abuse, and Injustice, had not only to be cut down, but 
rooted out. Therefore, I climg to my determination to write 
a book — an instrument of attack which, if it cuts and tears 
at all, does so as long as the need exists. Inasmuch as I 
knew that I still had to learn how to write I approached my 
task with deliberation. I planned to do two things: first, 
to crystallize my thoughts by discussion — telling the story 
of my life whenever, in my travels, I should meet any person 
who inspired my confidence; second, while the subject- 
matter of my book was shaping itself in my mind, to drill my- 
self by carrying out a letter-writing campaign. Both these 
things I did — as certain indulgent friends who bore the 
brunt of my spoken and written discourse can certify. I 
feared the less to be dubbed a bore, and I hesitated the less 
perhaps to impose upon good nature, because of my firm 
conviction that one in a position to help the many was him- 
self entitled to the help of the few. 

I wrote scores of letters of great length. I cared little if 
some of my friends should conclude that I had been born a 
century too late; for, without them as confidants, I must 
write with no more inspiring object in view than the waste- 
basket. Indeed,, I found it difficult to compose without 

282 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 283 

keeping before me the image of a friend. Having stipulated 
that every letter should be returned upon demand, I wrote 
without reserve — my imagination had free rein. I wrote 
as I thought, and I thought as I pleased. The result 
was that within six months I found myself writing with 
a facility which hitherto had obtained only during ela- 
tion. At first I was suspicious of this new-found and appar- 
ently permanent ease of expression — so suspicious that 1 
set about diagnosing my physical symptoms. My self- 
examination convinced me that I was, in fact, quite normal. 
I had no irresistible desire to write, nor was there any 
suggestion of that exalting light-heartedness which character- 
izes elation. Further, after a prolonged period of composi- 
tion, I experienced a comforting sense of exhaustion which 
I had not known while elated. I therefore concluded — 
and rightly — that my unwonted facility was the product 
of practice. At last I found myself able to conceive an idea 
and immediately transfer it to paper. 

In July, 1905, I came to the conclusion that the time for 
beginning my book was at hand. Nevertheless, I found it 
difficult to set a definite date. About this time I so arranged 
my itinerary that I was able to enjoy two summer — though 
stormy — nights and a day at the Summit House on Mount 
Washington. What better, thought I, than to begin my 
book on a plane so high as to be appropriate to this noble 
summit? I therefore began to compose a dedication. "To 
Humanity" was as far as I got. There the Muse forsook 
me. 

But, returning to earth and going about my business, I 
soon again found myself in the midst of inspiring natural 
surroundings — the Berkshire Hills. At this juncture Man 
came to the assistance of Nature, and perhaps with an un- 
consciousness equal to her own. It was a chance remark 



284 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

made by an eminent man that aroused my subconscious 
literary personality to irresistible action. I had long wished 
to discuss my project with a man of deserved reputation, 
and if his reputation were international, so much the better. 
I desired the unbiased opinion of a judicial mind. 
Opportunely, I learned that the Hon. Joseph H. Choate 
was then at his summer residence at Stockbridge, Massachu- 
setts. Now, I need offer no proof that Mr. Choate, like 
some eighty odd millions of others, had never heard of me. 
Neither had I a letter of introduction. But the exigencies 
of the occasion demanded that I conjure up one. Wishing 
can do much, for a burning desire can only be quenched by 
performance. The result was, I wrote my own letter of 
introduction and sent it: 



Red Lion Inn, 

Stockbridge, Mass. 
August 18, 1906. 
Hon. Joseph H. Choate, 

Stockbridge, Massachusetts. 
Dear Sir: — 

Though I might present myself at your door, armed with one of society's 
unfair skeleton-keys — a letter of introduction — I prefer to approach you 
as I now do: simply as a young man who honestly feels entitled to at least 
five minutes of your time, and as many minutes more as you care to grant 
because of your interest in the subject to be discussed. 

I look to you at this time for your opinion as to the value of some ideas 
of mine, and the feasibility of certain schemes based on them. 

A few months ago I talked with President Hadley of Yale, and briefly cut- 
lined my plans. He admitted that many of them seemed feasible and would, 
if carried out, add much to the svim-total of human happiness. His only 
criticism was that they were "too comprehensive." 

Not until I have staggered an imagination of the highest type will I ad- 
mit that I am trying to do too much. Shoiold you refuse to see me, believe 
me, when I tell you that you will still be, as you are at this moment, the un- 
conscious possessor of my sincere respect. 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 285 

Business engagements necessitate my leaving here early on Monday next. 
Should you care to communicate with me, word sent in care of this hotel 
will reach me promptly. 

Yours very truly, 
Cliffoiu) W. Beers. 



Within an hour I had received the following reply: 



Stockbridge, Mass., 

Friday evening. 
Clifford W. Beers, Esq., 
Dear Sir: — 

Your note of to-day rec'd. I will see you here for a few minutes to-mor- 
row morning at ten o'clock. 

Yours truly, 

Joseph H. Choate. 



The next morning at ten o'clock, the door, whose lock I 
had picked with a pen, opened before me and I was ushered 
into the presence of Mr. Choate. He was graciousness 
itself — but pointed significantly at a heap of unanswered 
correspondence lying before him. I took the hint and within 
ten minutes briefly outlined my purpose. After pronouncing 
my project a "commendable one," Mr. Choate offered the 
suggestion that produced results. Said he: "If you wiU 
submit your ideas in writing I shall be glad to read your 
manuscript and assist you in any way I can. To fully con- 
sider your scheme would require several hours, and busy men 
cannot very well give you so much time. What they can 
do is to read your manuscript during their leisure moments." 

Thus it was that Mr. Choate, by granting the inter- 
view, contributed to an earlier fruition of my plans. One week 
later I began the composition of this book. My action was 



286 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

unpremeditated, as my quitting Boston for less attractive 
Worcester proves. That very day, finding myself with a 
day and a half of leisure before me, I decided to tempt the 
Muse and compel myself to prove that my pen was, in truth, 
"the tongue of a ready writer." A stranger in the city, I 
went to a school of stenography and there secured the ser- 
vices of a young man who, though inexperienced in his art, 
was more skilled in catching thoughts as they took wing than 
I was in the art of setting them free. Except in the writing 
of one or two conventional business letters, never before 
had I dictated to a stenographer. After I had startled him 
into an attentive mood by briefly outlining my past career 
and present purpose, I worked without any definite plan or 
brief, or reference to data. My narrative was therefore 
digressive and only roughly chronological. But it served 
to get my material before my own eyes for future shaping. 
At this task I hammered away three or four hours a day for 
a period of five weeks. 

It so happened that Mr. Choate arrived at the same hotel 
on the same day with myself, so that some of the toil he had 
inspired went on in his proximity, if not in his presence; 
but I studiously kept out of his sight, lest he think me a 
"crank" on the subject of reform, bent on persecuting his 
leisure. 

As the work progressed my facility increased — in fact, I 
soon called in an additional stenographer to help in the snar- 
ing of my flying thoughts. This excessive productivity caused 
me to pause and again to diagnose my condition. I could 
not fail now to recognize in myself symptoms hardly dis- 
tinguishable from those which had obtained eight months 
earlier when it had been deemed expedient temporarily to 
restrict my freedom. But I had grown wise in adversity. 
Rather than interrupt my manuscript short of completion I 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 287 

decided to avail myself of a vacation that v^as due, and re- 
main without the borders of my native State — this, so that 
well-meaning but perhaps over-zealous relatives might be 
spared unnecessary anxiety, and I myself be spared pos- 
sible unwarranted restrictions. I was by no means certain 
as to the degree of mental excitement that would result from 
such continuous mental application; nor did I much care, so 
long as I accomplished my task. However, as I knew that 
"possession is nine points of the law," I decided to main- 
tain my advantage by remaining in my literary fortress. And 
my resolve was further strengthened by certain cherished 
sentiments expressed by John Stuart Mill in his essay "On 
Liberty," — an essay which I have read and re-read with 
an interest born of experience. 

At last the draft was completed. After a timely remit- 
tance (for, in strict accordance with the traditions of the craft, 
I had exhausted my financial resources) I started for home 
— with a sigh of relief. For months I had been under the 
burden of a conscious obligation. My memory, stored with 
information which, if rightly used, could, I believed, brighten 
unhappy lives, was to me as a basket of eggs which it was my 
duty to balance on a head whose poise was none too certain. 
One by one, during the preceding five weeks, I had gently 
lifted each thought from its resting-place, until my worri- 
some burden had been so shifted as to admit of its being 
imposed upon the public conscience. 

After I had lived over again the trials and the tortures 
of my unhappiest years — which was of course necessary in 
plowing and harrowing a memory, happily retentive — the 
completion of the draft left me exhausted. But after a trip 
to New York, whither I went to convince my employers 
that I should be granted a further leave-of-absence, I re- 
sumed work. The ground for this added favor was that my 



288 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

manuscript was too crude to submit to any but intimate ac- 
quaintances. Knowing perhaps that a business man with 
a literary bee buzzing in his ear is, for the time, no business 
man at all, my employers readily agreed that I should do as 
I pleased during the month of October. They also believed 
me entitled to the favor, recognizing the force of my belief 
that I had a high obligation to discharge. 

It was under the family roof-tree that I now set up my 
literary shop. Nine months earlier an unwonted interest 
in literature and reform had sent me to an asylum. That I 
should now in my own home be able to work out my destiny 
without unduly disturbing the peace of mind of relatives was 
a considerable satisfaction. In the very room where, during 
June, 1900, my reason had forsaken me, I re-dictated my 
account of that reason's experiences. It was concerning this 
draft that I received a good while afterward the first of the 
two letters from Professor William James of Harvard Uni- 
versity, which appear in the Introduction to this book. 

My lea ve-of- absence ended, I resimied my travels eagerly; 
for I wished to cool my brain by daily contact with the more 
prosaic minds of men of business. I went South. For a 
time I banished all thoughts of my book and project. But 
after some months of this change of occupation, which I 
thoroughly enjoyed, I found leisure in the course of wide 
travels to take up the work of revision. My hours of leisure 
I devoted more, however, to reading than to writing. The 
"excess baggage" which at times I had to pay, was occa- 
sioned by what I irreverently called "several pounds of rhet- 
oric." For, though Professor James had paid me the 
compliment of advising me not to re-write my story, I fear 
his advice must have been prompted by a doubt as to my 
ability to improve my composition, rather than the convic- 
tion that my crude draft was an excellent performance. 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 289 

That draft I submitted to all sorts and conditions of 
minds (in accordance with Mill's dictum: that only in that 
way can the truth be obtained). And it is at this point in 
my narrative, rather than in the dusty corners of the usual 
preface, that I wish to express my obligation to one critic 
and helper — my former school-fellow, Mr. Herbert Wescott 
Fisher. It was he who led me to see my need of technical 
training, neglected in earlier years. To be exact, however, 
I must confess that I read rather than studied rhetoric. 
Close application to its rules served only to discourage me, 
so I but lazily skimmed these worthy works. But my re- 
discovered friend did more than direct me to sources. He 
proved to be the kindly mean, between the two extremes 
of stranger and intimate. I was a prophet not without honor 
in his eyes. Upon my embarrassing wealth of material he 
brought to bear his practical knowledge of the workmanship 
of writing. My debt to him, in which the reader is a 
sharer, is almost beyond repayment. Scarcely a paragraph 
in this book is not the better for his direct touch. And 
my own drafting of the later parts has been so improved 
by the practice I have received under his scrupulous direction 
that he has had little fault to find with them. 

Nothing would please me more than to express specifically 
my indebtedness to many others who have assisted me in the 
preparation of my work. But, aside from calling attention 
to the fact that the managements of the two hospitals so 
fully discussed have exhibited rare magnanimity (even going 
so far as to write letters which have helped me in my work), 
and, further, acknowledging anonymously (the list is too long 
for explicit mention) the invaluable advice given me by scien- 
tists who have made my work authoritative, I must be content 
to indite an all-embracing acknowledgment. Therefore, and 
with distinct pleasure, I hereby emphasize the fact that the 



290 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

active encouragement of casual but trusted acquaintances, 
the inspiring indifference of unconvinced intimates, and the 
kindly scepticism of indulgent relatives, who, perforce, could 
do naught but obey an immutable law of blood-related 
minds, — all these influences conspired to render more sure 
the accomplishment of my heart's desire. 

And now the reader nears the end of my life-story. 
But, before closing this intimate part of my plea for justice 
long-delayed, I feel that it is my privilege, as it is my duty, 
to impress upon the reader that he has, unconsciously per- 
haps, assumed part of the burden which in the very telling 
of my story I have shifted to the shoulders of the many. 
If the reader does not now feel that he would like to do 
something to help those imfortunates for whom I speak, 
then either I have failed to present my story convincingly, 
or the reader's love of fair play and his moral nature are 
of a false kind. 



PART IV 

XXXVI 

One in telling such a story as mine owes it to the public 
to offer a feasible remedy for the evils disclosed. Especially 
is he under obligation to the relatives and friends of the 
insane, for a description of heart-rending conditions, offered 
without hope of correction, cannot but be painful to those 
most vitally interested in the problem. My obligation in 
mind, I have spared no effort to make this book authoritative. 
Alienists, psychologists, neurologists, pathologists, hospital 
officials, practical sociologists and organizers have been con- 
sulted. Indeed, as many as fifty persons, representing the 
more important activities of life, have read my work — in 
part or entirety — while it was in manuscript or the form of 
printed proof; and a goodly number of this small army of 
critics and advisers have found such delight in using the 
blue pencil of correction that I may now present my book and 
project with a sense of security which can come only to one 
whose work has been tried by fire — in private. To these 
unnamed critics my debt (and the reader's, I believe) is 
very great. 

By this time two paramount questions have no doubt arisen 
in the mind of the reader: First, is there in the problem of 
managing and treating the insane an inherent difficulty which 
will forever prevent the correction of such abuses and defi- 
ciencies as have been discussed in this book ? Second, if not, 
how may the individual assume part of the burden which in 
the telling of my story has been shifted to the shoulders of 
the many? 

291 



292 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

An emphatic answer to the first question may be given. 
No inherent difficulty stands in the way of the universal cor- 
rection of all abuses and deficiencies of treatment complained 
of in this book — unless it be the inherent apathy of a pub- 
lic which for centuries has failed to do its duty by the insane. 
Proof of the soundness of this conclusion may be found in the 
fact that at this moment an encouraging number of our 
hospitals for the insane are so ably managed that abuses, 
common in the poorly managed ones, rarely occur in institu- 
tions of the approved class. Freedom from the supposedly 
inevitable evils complained of may usually be traced and 
rightly attributed to the character and capacity of the man 
at the head of a given hospital. A high-minded, efficient 
superintendent, regardless of the apathy of the public, the 
costly economy of ill-informed legislators, or inadequate, 
even crude, material equipment of the hospital itself, may 
so conduct his institution as to protect his insane wards 
against physical abuse, indignities, and what, in so many 
cases, amounts to criminal neglect of patients scarcely able 
to help themselves. 

Surely the situation is by no means hopeless, so long as a 
superintendent of the right type can (almost single-handed) 
overcome a sufficient number of the inevitable difficulties 
to raise the standard of treatment in his institution to a 
humane level. For, if the efficient few, working under such 
unfavorable conditions as obtain generally to-day, can con- 
vert their respective hospitals into the semblance of model 
ones, how absurd to contend that there can be found among 
the more than one hundred thousand physicians in this 
country, fewer than four hundred men capable of assuming 
the responsibilities of a superintendency ? When intelligent 
and non-political care in the selection of superintendents 
shall be rigorously and universally exercised, then, threats, 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 293 

curses, camisoles, muffs, straps, unwarranted seclusion, il- 
legal exile and physical abuse in general will take their be- 
lated place in history along with the horrors of the Dark Ages. 

For bringing about the reforms which, of necessity, must 
precede any such correction of century-old abuses, the in- 
terest of every right-thinking person in this country must be 
enlisted. Few, indeed, are endowed with great riches. Few 
are able to convert their best impulses into an acceptable 
medium of exchange. But every man and woman can lend 
a hand, or at least speak a word. Our subject has for gen- 
erations been neglected. It is the discussion of it that will 
create and mold PubKc Opinion, and Public Opinion, vig- 
orously expressed, will, more than any other factor, tend to 
correct the evils I have denounced. Has my story utterly 
failed of its purpose? If it has stirred your sympathy it is 
your duty to give expression to this aroused interest, not to 
me, but to everybody within your sphere of influence. Con- 
tinual and sincere expression will wear away that rock of 
indifference against which the distressed souls and abused 
bodies of the insane have been bruised for centuries. Has 
my story — not as the story of my life, but as representing 
the experiences of thousands of others still living and of 
thousands whose terrible secrets died with them — has this 
story, I say, aroused within you the healthy desire to con- 
tribute at least your influence to the corrective and over- 
whelming force of Public Opinion? If so, your duty is 
plain. 

Individual assistance may be given in an easy way. 
Let each convinced reader of this book be prepared to send 
his name and address to whatever "Society," "Associa- 
tion" or "Committee," may be organized when the neces- 
sity for its existence has been brought home to the public. 
These names, in the aggregate, will form a mighty petition, 



294 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

the force of which no Federal or State official — or Com- 
mittee of Investigation, will care or dare to ignore. Thus, 
for the first time in history, legislators throughout the land 
will have impressed upon them the fact that the pubHc 
desires hospital managements to have support — such sup- 
port as will enable them to discharge their obligations 
to the public — and discharge them in a manner that will 
bring credit, not disgrace, to a nation distinguished for its 
love of fair play. 

If the individual may be enlisted in the work of reform, so 
may the Federal Government. I trust that in this I do not 
fall into the delusional fad which now seems to prevail of 
turning to Washington as the panacea for all the States' 
shortcomings. But, the principal business and justifica- 
tion of government is the protection of the weak against 
the strong, and, naturally, there are some things which the 
Federal Government can do better than any other agency. 
Everyone knows that through its Department of Agriculture 
this Nation each year expends many thousands of dollars in 
economically sound endeavors to exterminate the parasites 
which prey upon valuable plant and animal life. To anni- 
hilate the gypsy-moth in Massachusetts and the cattle- 
destroying tick in Texas, fortunes have been spent. All 
crops, except the crop upon which prosperity itself depends 
— the brain crop — have received, or are about to receive, 
their due protection at the hands of the Government. Yet 
generation after generation the health of men's minds has 
been neglected. 

An effective beginning might be made if the Government 
would establish a Federal Commission for the adequate 
statistical investigation of insanity.* Such a Commission, 

* See Appendix III for quotations from a report issued (July, 1906) by 
the Department of Commerce and Labor under the heading: "Insane and 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 295 

supported by governmental prestige and having at its dis- 
posal the wonderful machinery of the Census Bureau, could 
secure information which would be denied any private 
agency. And later, similar Commissions representing the 
nations of the world could form an International Commis- 
sion which should become a clearing-house for the world's 
best thought on the subject of insanity, its cause, cure, and 
eventual defeat as a common foe to mankind. 



A permanent agency for reform and education in the 
field of nervous and mental diseases is one of the great 
needs of the day. Such an agency — whatever its form — 
could do in its own field what the National Society for the 
Prevention and Cure of Tuberculosis has done, and is 
doing, in its sphere of activity. Though the improve- 
ment of conditions among those actually insane and con- 
fined should ever be an important factor in shaping the 
poHcy of such an organization, its most important work 
would be the waging of an educative war against the pre- 
vailing ignorance regarding insanity. This, to cure the 
disease by preventing it, is the only effective cure known. 
The watchword of such an organization might well be the 
significant phrase: Mental Hygiene. Its purpose: the 
spreading of a common-sense gospel of right thinking in 
order to bring about right living, knowledge of which is 
needed by the public at large if the population of our 
asylums is to be controlled and eventually decreased. A 
campaign of education, rigorously carried on, would, in time. 

Feeble-minded in Hospitals and Institutions, 1904." The compiler of 
this report complains of the inadequate data on which he had to base his 
conclusions. 



296 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

lead to the rescue of thousands who, if left in ignorance, 
must, of necessity, drift into a state of actual and perhaps 
incurable insanity. Editors, ministers, educators, philan- 
thropists, and members of the medical profession, as well, 
could do much to further such a work of enlightenment. 

Having promised the reader a "remedy," I dare to offer 
a definite recommendation, based on the advice of interested 
supporters who, for years, have been actively engaged in 
successful works of reform and education. I suggest that a 
"National Committee" (modeled after the very efficient 
"National Child Labor Committee") shall, without delay, 
be brought to a working perfection. Such a "Committee" 
could co-operate with Federal, State, and local agencies — 
and do so in such a manner that representative men and 
women in each State may, when it takes shape, control the 
movement in their respective communities. 

The ramifications of the proposed organization would 
be so numerous as not to admit of detailed description 
here. Suffice it to say that the "National Committee for 
Mental Hygiene" (I present the name for consideration) 
would be equally the friend of the physician and the patient ; 
also the friend of a patient's relatives, to whom, when bur- 
dened with an actual or impending affliction, it would be- 
come an unfailing source of information, advice, and com- 
fort. In a word, it would be a friend to Humanity, for no 
man knows when he himself may have to look to it for 
assistance. 



■ff 



XXXVII 

The history of the development of Non-Restraint is in- 
tensely interesting, but too long a story to admit of its incor- 
poration in this book. However, the reader may gain a 
comprehensive idea of the inception of this humane principle, 
its scientific value and practicability, if he will but turn to 
Appendix I and read the opinion of an earnest believer 
in Non-Restraint, Dr. Charles W. Page, Superintendent of 
the Danvers State Hospital for the Insane, at Hathorne, 
Massachusetts. An active superintendent of wide experi- 
ence, he testifies that since dehberately introducing Non- 
Restraint, "I have been responsible for the custody and 
treatment of more than six thousand insane persons, not 
one of whom was restrained with mechanical appliances by 
my orders or within my knowledge." How, then, can any 
superintendents, worthy of support, continue to use apolo- 
getically that cruel method which they dare not freely 
advocate? The mere fact that their attitude is apologetic 
proves that these unprogressive men (to use a mild term) can 
be converted, provided Public Opinion will do its right 
work. 

Though the universal adoption and continued use of Non- 
Restraint will contribute to the well-being, even happiness, 
of the inmates of our hospitals, its use alone cannot materially 
decrease the total number of insane persons, except in so far 
as the resulting recoveries will more than offset the average 
greater number of years a patient is Ukely to live in an insti- 
tution where he is treated kindly and scientifically from 

297 



/ 



298 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

the moment of commitment. Of course, if, in a supposedly 
humane age, it is the poUcy of the pubHc to treat the unfor- 
tunate insane harshly, even brutally, with the hope of killing 
some and cutting short the lives of others, destined to live 
long under favorable conditions, Restraint is the method of 
treatment to use, and the more cruel and repressive it is, the 
easier will it be for some cold-blooded calculator to prove 
that by its means, money has been saved the State. But 
it will be at the cost of killing many patients who might 
recover; and, further, such an accountant in arriving at 
his heartless result would certainly have to disregard the 
economically sound law that it is cheaper for the State 
to spend any amount of money for the prevention and 
cure of insanity than it is to neglect those threatened or 
afflicted with it. 

It is evident, therefore, that insanity, if it is ever to be con- 
quered, must be attacked along lines not commonly followed 
to-day. As to the method of attack to adopt there can be no 
argument, for the masters of medical education in every 
country on the continent of Europe have proved the prac- 
ticability and value of the plan in question. What is needed 
in order to reach the root of the problem of insanity is the 
establishing of so-called Psychiatric or Psychopathic Hos- 
pitals in connection with our Medical Schools, — hospitals 
wherein nervous and mental diseases may be treated in the 
most scientific manner, not only for the benefit of the 
patients, but also for the benefit of physicians and stu- 
dents. What a leap forward in humanitarian endeavor 
it would be if each university, so situated and organ- 
ized as to warrant it, should have under its everlasting 
protection a modem Psychopathic Hospital! (Have not 
seats of learning outlasted seats of government?) And 
what could be more appropriate than the restoration 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 299 

of lost reasons under the hospitable protection of the very 
institutions wherein reason itself is trained to do its right 
work ? Thus will it become possible to instruct the medical 
profession generally in psychiatry or psychopathology — a 
branch of medicine about which thousands of physicians 
know little, — or, in many instances, nothing at all. In 
addition, numberless persons threatened with mental col- 
lapse, or actually insane, will then receive the benefit of 
prompt and scientific treatment at a time when the mental 
life of the afflicted one hangs in the balance. Further, 
Psychopathic Hospitals will enable scientists to study insan- 
ity; and such institutions, by setting a high standard, will 
soon raise the standard of treatment throughout the country. 

The necessity for such modem hospitals may be appre- 
ciated when an accredited authority in this country on 
matters pertaining to medical education (Dr. William H. 
Welch of Johns Hopkins University) can say, as he did to 
the writer of this book: ''The most urgent need in medical 
education in America, to-day, is the need of Psychiatric 
Clinics (Psychopathic Hospitals) where medical students, 
and physicians as well, may benefit by instruction in psy- 
chiatry, and where scientific research into the cause and cure 
of insanity may be carried on unceasingly." 

When the fact is considered that each university in Ger- 
many, France, Italy, Switzerland, Austria, Russia, Norway, 
Sweden, Denmark, Holland, Belgium, Brazil, Argentine 
Republic and Japan, at the pesent time, has a psychiatric 
clinic under its own control, and that no physician in most 
of these countries may practice medicine until he has passed 
a satisfactory examination in psychiatry, the disgraceful 
state of affairs existing in this, the richest nation in the world, 
may be the more readily appreciated. In Germany a 
system of state-supported sanatoriums has long been in 



300 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 



successful operation. These institutions, however, are not 
open to those afflicted with a developed mental disease. 
They are designed for the exclusive use of those threatened 
with mental collapse. The Germans engage in the rescu- 
ing of those threatened with insanity because they have 
been wise enough to realize that it is cheaper to help the 
individual back to health than to let him break down com- 
pletely and live, perhaps for years, a burden on the State. 
In the hght of such embarrassing facts, it is indeed 
high time that the United States of America should 
prove itself the vauntedly progressive nation it is sup- 
posed to be, by taking hold of the neglected problem 
of insanity, and, through its several State Legislatures, 
bringing into existence Psychopathic Hospitals of the type 
described in the interesting U. S. Consular Report on 
the Munich Clinic, quoted in full in Appendix II. That 
the movement toward the erection of such model hos- 
pitals is already under way is a fact, and those who know the 
field predict that within five years a majority of the States 
will be operating institutions of the desired type, and that 
within a decade no State will be without at least one Psycho- 
pathic Hospital of its own.^ Thus far, Michigan is the only 
State in the Union to erect a modern Psychopathic Hos- 
pital. New York, however, has taken steps toward the 
erection of one, a well-meant though totally inadequate 
appropriation having been voted for the purpose.^ 

1 In the year 1906, at a cost of about $75,000, a hospital of this type was 
brought under the control of the University Hospital at Ann Arbor, Michi- 
gan. Because of the close relations existing between the State authorities 
and those of the University (of Michigan), this new institution, though 
virtually a part of the University, is at the same time a part of the system 
of State Hospitals. 

^If this State will appropriate, say, Si, 000,000 instead of the com- 
paratively paltry $300,000 already voted, New York City will have 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 301 

As the location of this particular type of hospital is of 
vital importance, I shall here venture to emphasize an 
underlying principle which cannot be safely ignored when 
the selection of a site for such an institution comes up 
for decision. After discussing this subject with alienists, 
superintendents and assistant physicians of hospitals for 
the insane, and with certain recognized authorities on 
the needs of the insane, I am led to the sure conclusion 
that Psychopathic Hospitals erected at the expense of the State 
should be made a part of the existing hospital system. No 
State Hospital can hope to fulfil its functions properly until 
it has under its control, and within easy reach — that is, 
within the hospital confines — a separate building erected 
for the purpose of treating acute cases of insanity, either 
newly-admitted ones, or so-called chronic cases during 
recurrent, acute periods of depression or excitement. Pa- 
tients of the latter class are numerous in our large hospitals, 
and when a management, because of inadequate equipment, 
has to treat such cases in the wards with patients less dis- 
turbed, a great injustice is done not only to the "acute cases" 
but to all other patients who are forced to live in the same 
ward with them. Failure on the part of those in authority 
to provide each State Hospital for the Insane with a Psycho- 
pathic Hospital or PaviHon (by which is meant a separate 
building, or group of small buildings) will bring about 
a result which it is painful even to contemplate ; for the mo- 
ment the Psychopathic Hospital is set apart as a favored type 
of institution, that moment will the State Hospitals or asy- 
lums, so-called, sink — in the estimation of the public — to 
a level far below the level of the worst managed asylum 
at present in existence. To adopt a policy which would 

what it so richly deserves — a modern hospital as good as the one at 
Munich. 



302 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

widen the already great gulf that exists between gen- 
eral hospitals and asylums would undo in a day the work 
of a century. I have criticised with a considerable, yet mer- 
ited, severity, our State Hospitals for the Insane; neverthe- 
less, these two hundred and odd hospitals, erected at a cost 
to the Nation of over one hundred milHons of dollars, con- 
stitute the nucleus of what will, in time, — if rightly man- 
aged — become the most perfect hospital system in the world. 
Continue to force the several managements to minister to 
the insane with hospitals which lack that most essential 
remedial feature, the Psychopathic Pavilion, and the dread 
of insanity and asylums which of late years (I am thankful 
to be able to record) has grown noticeably and hope- 
fully weaker, will not only be perpetuated — it will be 
cruelly and needlessly intensified ! But let the many States 
in the Union which shall erect Psychopathic Hospitals 
during the ensuing decade make a beginning by adding to 
our existing asylums adequate treatment divisions, and the 
present dread of insanity, and the dread of asylums, will, in 
a relatively short time, be reduced to an intelligent minimum. 
Then ordinary asylums, instead of continuing to rank as 
mere prison-houses, will rise to the level of the best of our 
general hospitals, and eventually they will become a source 
of justifiable pride to the Nation. 

I would not have it thought that I favor the building of 
Psychopathic Hospitals only where they may be brought 
under the control of a state hospital already established. 
My advice in that connection had to do only with appropri- 
ations that shall be made during the next few years by State 
Legislatures. When it comes to philanthropic work that 
may be done by individuals of vast wealth, or by bodies of 
public-spirited men and women for the benefit of their re- 
spective communities, the suggestion I have to make is quite 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 303 

different. At first, money secured from private sources 
should go toward the building and endowing of Psycho- 
pathic Hospitals, which preferably may be brought under 
the control of those universities which have medical de- 
partments. 

Cities where there are universities, and the larger and 
wealthier cities throughout the country, will before long have 
such institutions; but the smaller cities — even some having 
from one hundred to three hundred thousand inhabitants — 
will be unable to secure or maintain independent Psycho- 
pathic Hospitals. As each community owes it to itself to 
make provision for the prompt treatment of cases of incipient 
insanity, and thus spare the individual the ordeal of commit- 
ment as an incompetent, it is fortunate that relief is at 
hand for such cities as cannot maintain a modem Psycho- 
pathic Hospital. Here the so-called General Hospital may 
be put to full use. Separate buildings, or pavilions, may 
be erected and maintained at comparatively slight cost, as 
has already been proved by the success of the Psychopathic 
Hospital at Ann Arbor, Michigan. That is to say, for con- 
siderably less than $100,000 an efficient department of Men- 
tal and Nervous diseases may be organized and brought 
under the control of any well managed General Hos- 
pital. Though there is but one General Hospital in the 
country where this problem has been worked out, the results 
of what five years ago was an experiment have justified the 
rather startling venture made by the pioneer in this impor- 
tant work.^ Dr. J. Montgomery Mosher, Speciahst in Ner- 
vous and Mental Diseases at the Albany Hospital, Albany, 

' At Bellevue Hospital (New York City) cases of insanity are received and 
held pending examination and transfer. As few patients remain longer 
than five days in this Psychopathic Ward, the ward becomes little more than 
a clearing-house for trouble — not an agency for cure. 



304 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

N. Y., is the man who has had the courage and good sense 
to go ahead and prove that a General Hospital should and 
can receive and treat mental diseases as successfully as the 
diseases which are now treated without question in such 
institutions. In Pavilion F, at the Albany Hospital, remark- 
able results have been obtained during the five years it has 
been in operation. This is proved by a passage from an 
address by Dr. Mosher delivered before the 34th National 
Conference of Charities and Corrections at Minneapolis, 
Minnesota, June i8th, 1907. He says: 

"From February i8th, 1902, the day of the first admission, 
to February 28th, 1907, one thousand thirty patients have en- 
tered the building (Pavilion F). Of these five hundred and 
ninety-six have returned to their homes recovered and im- 
proved ; three hundred and sixteen have remained stationary, 
and eighty-six have died. Two hundred and forty-five 
have been transferred to institutions for the insane; of these, 
one hundred and twenty-six were sent to Pavilion F for 
detention during the legal proceedings, and one hundred and 
eighteen were committed after a period of observation. It 
thus appears that nine hundred and five patients have been 
under treatment without legal process, one hundred and 
eighteen of whom it became necessary to commit later to 
institutions for the insane. 

"If this special provision for the treatment of the mentally 
deranged had not been made in the Albany Hospital, then 
these nine hundred and eight patients would either have had 
to be improperly treated at home, or would have been com- 
mitted after a probably harmful development of the disease. 
It is impossible to judge how many have been saved from an 
unnecessary commitment," 

I urge the reader to turn to Appendix IV where he 
will find Dr. Mosher's address in full. It will prove that 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 305 

General Hospitals throughout the country should begin 
to receive and treat nervous and mental diseases as is 
now being done with success at the General Hospital at 
Albany. 



XXXVIII 

Given Psychopathic Hospitals and "Mental Wards" or 
"Pavilions" at our General Hospitals, there still remains 
another type of institution to be added if patients with a 
chance for recovery are to receive the treatment they deserve. 
Statistics show that twenty per cent of those who recover 
from an attack of insanity recover after having been con- 
fined in a hospital or asylum for a year or more. Obviously, 
recoverable cases cannot remain for that length of time in a 
Psychopathic Hospital or in a "Mental Ward" in a General 
Hospital. The hospital or "Pavilion" with a Hmited num- 
ber of beds (and it will be many years before there are a 
sufficient number of Psychopathic Hospitals to supply the 
demand for accommodations) must, of necessity, keep its 
population moving if the acute cases occurring every day 
are to be received and given treatment at a time when the 
lives — mental lives, at least — of the afilicted ones hang in 
the balance. To make room for new cases, the hopeful 
and convalescent cases must be transferred to the homes of 
the patients — there to disorganize and distress the house- 
holds; or they must be transferred to an asylum; or, provided 
the expense can be borne, transferred to a private hospital 
or sanatorium. This state of affairs lays bare a fault which 
should be corrected without delay. It is evident, therefore, 
that an intermediate type of institution state-supported, 
co-operatively managed, or endowed, should be brought 
into the field. 

Here the model sanatorium — a place of considerable 

306 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 307 

freedom — should intervene. In time the several States 
(following the enhghtened example of Germany) will 
no doubt erect such institutions, but so much remains 
to be done by the States in the way of improving existing 
State Hospitals and asylums that the immediate creation of 
these indispensable adjuncts to a perfect hospital system 
must be undertaken by public- spirited citizens, possessed of 
wealth and the impulse to spend it for the good of those 
less fortunate. If one man, Mr. D. O. Mills of New 
York, may erect and operate, at a fair return on his in- 
vestment, hotels which provide self-respecting poor with 
wholesome surroundings and good food, and still charge 
only nominal rates for the accommodations, why may 
not philanthropy and business be likewise combined for 
the benefit of those threatened with nervous or mental 
collapse ? This class would include those who, after treat- 
ment in a Psychopathic Hospital, must continue treatment 
of some kind for the few months which will elapse be- 
fore they are again in condition to engage in gainful 
occupation. In suggesting that the "Mills Hotel Plan" 
be applied to the sanatorium field, I think I am on safe 
ground; and I trust that individuals of wealth will turn 
their attention to a field so rich in possibilities that it may be 
worked at a profit that can be measured not only in money, 
but in service to mankind. 

Perhaps, if I give an added chapter of my experiences, 
those in a position to correct a great evil will be the more 
ready to undertake the work. 



XXXIX 

The particular evil I have referred to at the end of the 
preceding chapter is the heartless way in which many owners 
of private hospitals and sanatoriums take advantage of 
people in distress. Knowing that the relatives of an 
insane person will seldom place him in a public insti- 
tution until their resources are completely exhausted, these 
owners proceed to drive almost as sharp a bargain as they 
would were they trading horses with a known trickster. 
The desire to succor distressed relatives is an emotion 
scarcely known to this type of man. CommerciaHsm, not 
philanthropy, is his passion. "Pay the price or place 
your relative in a public institution!" is the burden of his 
discordant song before commitment. "Pay, or get out!" is 
his jarring refrain when satisfied that he has exhausted the 
family resources. 

Though I am well within my rights in criticising the qual- 
ity of heart exhibited by typical owners of such institutions 
as are run for personal gain, it is only fair to point out that 
this hardness of heart of the individual is but a chip off the 
stumbHng-block of pubHc apathy. So long as the public 
refuses or neglects to establish hospitals where the insane 
may receive the best of treatment at minimum cost, is it 
reasonable to expect individuals to invest fortunes in a re- 
sponsible and irksome work unless they see the chance to 
extort an unfair return? Assuredly not. In fact, these 
owners, by much and continued thought, have tricked them- 
selves into the belief that they are indeed public benefactors 

308 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 309 

— wherein they are not entirely wrong, for they have, in a 
measure, filled the gap that exists in our hospital system of 
to-day. 

Do you imagine that I speak with undue severity ? Let 
me then refer to certain hitherto unrecorded incidents in my 
own life. They occurred while I was an inmate of a private 
sanatorium of the type condemned. The institution in 
question, though by no means deserving of rank among the 
best, is one of the largest of its kind in this country. From 
a modest beginning, made not many years ago, it has en- 
joyed a mushroom growth, and to-day harbors about two 
hundred and fifty unfortunates. Its material equipment is 
cheap. It is composed of a dozen or more small frame build- 
ings, suggestive of a mill settlement. Outside the limits of 
a city, and in a State where there is no ofiicial supervision 
worth mentioning, the owner of this little settlement of woe 
has erected a nest of veritable fire-traps. Within these the 
most helpless of all mankind are forced to risk lives which 
may, or may not, again be of real value. This is a dangerous 
economy, but it is of course necessary if the owner is surely 
to grind out an exorbitant interest on his investment. 

The same spirit of economy pervades the entire institu- 
tion. Its worst manifestation is in the employment of 
the meanest type of attendant. In a State Hospital for the 
Insane there is perhaps some slight excuse for limiting the 
remuneration of attendants, for there the appropriation for 
maintenance per week is limited usually to three or four 
dollars for each of the patients. But, in private sana- 
toriums, where the average minimum charge per week is, 
as a rule, twenty or twenty-five dollars, and where many 
patients pay forty or fifty dollars or more, there is no excuse 
for an economy so pernicious. The owner of such a gold 
mine cannot honestly plead that a lack of funds forces 



3IO A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

him to employ attendants who are willing to work for a 
paltry eighteen dollars a month — $4.50 per week — a wage 
which kitchen servants frequently refuse to accept. Occasion- 
ally a competent attendant consents to work here when there 
is a scarcity of profitable employment elsewhere. Witness 
the young man who, shortly after my arrival at this private 
institution, providentially (for me) sought and secured a 
position. He received only eighteen dollars a month at the 
beginning; the sixth and last month of his employment there 
he received the same meager wage. This man, so long as 
he remained in the good graces of the owner-superintendent, 
was admittedly one of the best attendants he had ever had. 
Yet aside from a five-dollar bill which a relative had sent me 
at Christmas and which I had refused to accept because of 
my belief that it, as well as my relatives, was counterfeit — 
aside from that, this competent attendant and charitable 
friend received no additional rewards. His chief reward lay in 
his consciousness of the fact that he was protecting me against 
injustices which surely would have been visited upon me had 
he quitted his position and left me to the mercies of the owner 
and his ignorant assistants. To-day, with deep apprecia- 
tion, I often contrast the treatment I received at his hands 
with that which I suffered during the three weeks preceding 
his appearance on the scene. During that period, not fewer 
than seven attendants contributed to my misery. Though 
some of them were perhaps decent enough fellows outside 
a sick-room, not one had more right to minister to a man 
in my condition than has a butcher to perform delicate 
operations in surgery. 

The two who first attended me did not strike me with 
their fists or even threaten to do so; but their unconscious 
lack of consideration for my comfort and peace of mind 
was torture. They were typical eighteen-doUar-a-month at- 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 311 

tendants. Another attendant of the same sort, on one occa- 
sion, cursed me with a degree of brutaUty which I prefer not 
to recall, much less record. And a few days later the climax 
was appropriately capped when still another eighteen-doUar- 
a-month attendant perpetrated an outrage which a sane 
man would have resented to the point of homicide. He was 
a man of the coarsest type. His hands would have done 
credit to a longshoreman — fingers knotted and nearly twice 
the normal size. Because I refused to obey a peremptory 
command, and this at a time when I habitually refused on 
pain even of imagined torture to obey or to speak, this brute 
not only cursed me with abandon, he deliberately spat upon 
me. I was a mental incompetent, but like many others in 
a similar position, I was, both by antecedents and by train- 
ing, a gentleman. Vitriol could not have seared my flesh 
more deeply than the venom of this human viper stung my 
soul! Yet, as I was rendered speechless by delusions, I could 
offer not so much as a word of protest. I trust that it is not 
now too late, however, to protest in behalf of the thousands 
of outraged patients in private and State hospitals whose 
mute submission to such indignities has never been recorded. 

If the owner-superintendent of this particular sanatorium 
were brought to book for such offenses, what excuse would 
he offer? A hundred to one he would enter the evasive 
plea that such outrages were committed not only without 
his consent but without his suspicion. That he did not 
expressly countenance such practices I concede. As to his 
not suspecting that ignorant, untrained, ill-paid attendants 
do continually outrage the finer feelings of patients, I im- 
peach the truth and the sincerity of such a denial. These 
owners know what must be the natural consequences of their 
niggardly policy. 

Of their readiness to employ inferior attendants, I shall 



312 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

offer a striking illustration. The attendant who acted as 
my protector at this sanatorium has given me an affidavit 
embodying certain facts which, of course, I could not have 
known at the time of their occurrence. The gist of this 
sworn statement is as follows : One day a man — seemingly 
a tramp — approached the main building at the sanatorium 
and inquired for the owner. He soon found him, talked 
with him a few minutes, and an hour or so later he was sit- 
ting at the bedside of an old and infirm man. This aged 
patient had recently been committed to the institution by 
relatives who had labored under the common delusion that 
the payment of a considerable sum of money each week 
would insure kindly treatment. When this tramp-attend- 
ant first appeared, all his visible worldly possessions were 
contained in a small bundle which he carried under his arm. 
So filthy were his person and his clothes that he received a 
compulsory bath and another suit before being assigned 
to duty. He then began to earn his four dollars and fifty 
cents a week by sitting several hours a day in the room with 
the aged man, sick unto death. My informant soon en- 
gaged him in conversation. What facts did he elicit ? First, 
that the uncouth stranger never before had worked as an 
attendant, nor had he ever so much as crossed the threshold 
of a hospital. His last job had been as a member of a 
section-gang on a railroad. From the roadbed of a railway 
to the bedside of a man about to die was indeed a change 
which might have taxed the adaptabihty of a more versatile 
being. But as coarse as he was, this unkempt novice did 
not abuse his charge, — except in so far as his inability to 
interpret or anticipate the wants of the patient contrib- 
uted to that afflicted one's distress. My own attend- 
ant, realizing that the patient in question was suffering most 
of all for the want of those innumerable attentions which a 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 313 

trained nurse cannot fail to bestow, spent a part of his time 
in this unhappy room, which was but across the hall from 
my own. The end soon came. My attendant, whose ex- 
perience had been a wide one, detected the unmistakable 
signs of impending death. He forthwith informed the 
owner of the sanatorium that Mr. was in a dying con- 
dition, and urged him (a doctor) to repair at once to the bed- 
side of the patient. The doctor refused to comply with the 
request on the plea that he was, at the time, "too busy." 
When at last he did visit the room the patient was dead. 
Then came the supervisor who took charge of the body. 
As it was being carried from the room this "handyman" of 
the owner's said: "There goes the best paying patient the 
institution had; the doctor" (meaning the owner) "was 
getting eighty-five dollars a week out of him." Of this 
sum not more than twenty dollars at most could be con- 
sidered as "cost of maintenance." The remaining sixty-five 
dollars went into the pocket of the owner. Had the man 
lived for one year the owner might have pocketed as a profit 
(so far as this one case was concerned) the neat but wicked 
sum of thirty-three hundred and eighty dollars. And what 
would the patient have received? The same privilege of 
living in neglect and dying neglected. 

To this day the relatives of the victim of this outrageous 
neglect do not know of the injustice that was done them. 
They believed that eighty-five dollars a week would in- 
sure the best of attention, — and so it would have done 
had the trusted owner been deserving of the confidence 
placed in him.^ From a reliable source I learn that the 

* Other instances of abuses existing in private hospitals for the in- 
sane will be found in Appendix V, where a brief report appears, written 
by M. Allen Starr, M.D., Professor of Nervous and Mental Diseases at 
Columbia University. 



314 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

owner of the run-for-gain sanatorium discussed, brags that 
his profit during a recent year amounted to $98,000. My 
informant, a man conversant with the question at issue, 
figures that a profit of six dollars a week from each pa- 
tient would have enabled this acquisitive owner to make 
the $98,000 he professes to have made. But let us cut 
the reported brag in two, just to be on the safe side. 
Does any one believe that an inefiicient owner of a sana- 
torium deserves to receive a yearly profit equal to the 
salary of the President of the United States? 

As to my own experience at this institution : during the first 
weeks of it, my relatives were obliged to pay forty dollars a 
week for my care. Under the circumstances it was not an un- 
reasonable figure — for, both by day and night, I required 
an attendant; nor do I even affirm that the eighty-five 
dollars a week, wrung from the rich man, was in itself 
exorbitant. But is it right for the owner of a sanatorium 
to demand and accept either forty or eighty-five dollars a 
week, and then permit the helpless patient to be subjected 
to indignities and neglect? I know of a sanatorium where 
the owner refuses to take any patient who cannot afford to 
pay one hundred dollars a week. He caters to the wealthy, 
and secures a sufficient number of patients to fill his hospital. 
I respect that man. He deserves success, for he gives each 
patient better care than he could possibly get in the most 
self-sacrificing household. To expect him to reduce his 
rates would be as unreasonable as to expect the owner of 
real estate, simply because a church or hospital is to be 
erected thereon, to sell it below the market price. The law 
of supply and demand (together with a culpable lack of 
State supervision) regulates the rates now charged by owners 
of sanatoriums. Therefore the lowering of rates to a fair 
figure can be brought about only when Psychopathic Hos- 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 315 

pitals and co-operative, or endowed, sanatoriums shall 
have entered the field of competition. That such institu- 
tions will reduce the prevailing exorbitant charges, and 
force the existing type of owner to treat his patients and 
their relatives fairly, is at least indicated, if not proved, by 
the fact that the Psychopathic Hospital at Munich, Ger- 
many, — the finest of its kind in the world — charges for 
the most scientific treatment known, not more than $16.66 
a week, and as low as $9.52; with a minimum of $4.97 per 
week for patients unable to pay more. And as stated in 
the Consular Report (Appendix II) "the treatment and 
medical services are precisely the same to all, according to 
condition and necessities." 

Not so, however, in a majority of private institutions. 
The quality of the food, for instance, is Hkely to vary with 
the fee paid. The poorer patients are, in a way, the buz- 
zards of the flock. The coarsest cuts are their accustomed 
portion. To this the attendants themselves can testify, 
for they are often forced to eat veritable husks — the crumbs 
which fall from the owner's table. In my opinion the 
food served at the State Hospital was far better than that 
served to many patients at this run-for-profit sanatorium: 
and the food served at the large private hospital, conducted 
not for personal profit, was, on the whole, as good as any 
man might need or desire. 

This comparison is illuminating. The owner of a pri- 
vate sanatorium is but human, and it is extremely difiicult 
for him to see any advantage in supplying food of quality 
or variety, when, by so doing, his profit will be decreased by 
thousands of dollars during a single year. The manage- 
ment of an incorporated and endowed institution, whose 
only possible profit is to be found in their agreed salaries, 
would not be hkely to impose in this way upon their insane 



3i6 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

charges and patrons. No corrupting desire for gain would 
influence them. It is highly desirable, therefore, that all 
private hospitals for the insane should at once be brought 
under rigorous State supervision, requiring that such insti- 
tutions be duly incorporated under laws which will protect 
patients against abuse and patrons against extortion, — at 
the same time permitting a trustworthy owner to make a 
fair profit on his investment. Or, better still — and even- 
tually I hope to behold it — let there be no hospitals at all 
run for private gain. I do not advocate a hasty change. 
It will be years before there are in operation a sufiicient 
number of Psychopathic Hospitals, "mental wards" in 
General Hospitals, and co-operative sanatoriums to render 
useless the existing type of run-for-gain institutions. In the 
meantime PubHc Opinion, through proper channels, should 
so far as possible force owners of private hospitals to re- 
duce their charges to a fair figure and, at the same time, 
treat all patients with consideration and honesty. 



^ 



CONCLUSION 

The field is before us! The disgrace of the facts (of 
which I have related but a few) still cries to Heaven. 
Though the days of dungeons, manacles, shackles, ropes, 
straps, and chains have, in the main, passed, it should 
yet be borne in mind that our great hospitals, with their 
beautiful grounds, are too often but cloaks wherewith 
a well-intentioned but blind civilization still covers a 
hideous nakedness. This cruel and deceptive cloak must 
be torn off. Let these mysteries be converted into open 
Truth and Fairness. That the pubHc has long been de- 
ceived by appearances is not surprising. For, even I, in 
walking casually through the wards of such a hospital, find 
it weU-nigh impossible to reahze that many of the inmates 
are subjected to even mild abuse. Even I, who have suf- 
fered the most exquisite torture from "muffs" and strait- 
jackets (camisoles), have, in my several tours of inspection at 
State Hospitals, looked upon a patient so bound with a feel- 
ing rather akin to curiosity than sympathy. So innocent do 
these instruments of restraint appear when one views a 
victim for the few moments it takes to pass him by, it is 
little wonder that a glib-tongued apologist of "Restraint" 
may easily convince one that the bound patient is, in 
fact, better so. Nevertheless, he is not better so. The few 
seconds that the observer beholds him are but an infinitesi- 
mal fraction of the long hours, days or weeks, that he must 
endure the embrace of what soon becomes an engine of 
torture. There is but one remedy for the evils attending 

317 



3i8 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

the mechanical restraint of the insane. At once and for- 
ever abandon the vicious and crude principle which makes 
its use possible. 

The question is : will the reader help to bring about im- 
proved conditions? If so, let him take his stand as an 
advocate of Non-Restraint. So will he befriend those un- 
fortunates whose one great need may best be epitomized in 
these words — the words of a man who for a score of years 
worked among the insane in the capacity of assistant 
physician, and later as superintendent of a state hospital. 
His simple though vital remark to me was: "After all, 
what the insane most need is a friend!'^ 

These words, so spoken, came with a certain startling 
freshness. And yet it was the subhme and healing power 
of this same love which received its most signal demonstra- 
tion two thousand years ago at the hands of one who restored 
to reason and his home that man of Scripture "who had his 
dwelling among the tombs ; and no man could bind him, no, 
not with chains : Because that he had been often bound with 
fetters and chains, and the chains had been plucked asunder 
by him, and the fetters broken in pieces : neither could any 
man tame him. And always, night and day, he was in 
the mountains, and in the tombs, crying, and cutting him- 
self with stones. But when he saw Jesus afar off, he ran 
and worshipped him. And cried with a loud voice, and 
said, What have I to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of the 
Most High God ? I adjure thee by God, that thou torment 
me not." 



For twenty centuries the cry of the insane has been and 
to-day is: "Torment me not! Torment me not!" 



APPENDICES 



APPENDIX I 

Mechanical Restraint and Seclusion of Insane 
Persons 

by charles w. page, m.d. 

Read at State Board of Insanity Conference, State House, Boston, 
Massachusetts, May 17, 1904. 

Whele a certain proportion of the human family must 
have suffered from mental disorders for ages past, it is only 
about one hundred years since the propriety of controlling 
insane persons by the aid of manacles, shackles, chains, 
ropes, straps, etc., was especially called into question. At 
this stage of the world's progress, it is difficult for one to 
comprehend those former-day doctrines of philosophy, 
religion and ethics which overpowered or distorted human 
sensibilities to such a degree that compassion for the afflicted 
insane had little, if any weight in deciding what measures 
should be employed in their treatment; while a vague mys- 
terious horror, or fear of the disease, readily suggested to 
friends or custodians barbarous antagonism to its manifes- 
tations. During the political and social upheaval of the 
French Revolution, but quite aside from any design on the 
part of the revolutionary actors, that great moral genius, 
Philippe Pinel, was appointed superintendent of the Bicetre, 
the great Paris asylum for incurable insane men. When 
Pinel entered the asylum with M. Couthon, a member of the 
Commune, they were greeted, it is said, "by the yells and 
exclamations of three hundred maniacs, who mingled the 
clanking of their chains with the uproar of their voices." 
22 321 



322 APPENDIX I 

This horrible condition of things had existed indefinitely 
without a recorded protest from political officials, church 
authorities, or friendly philanthropists. Public opinion had 
come to regard such conditions as inevitable, and yet we aU 
know to-day that the shocking features of that gloomy Paris 
prison asylum were due entirely to ignorance, and "man's 
inhumanity to man." Pinel alone held such an opinion at 
that time, and when he requested permission of the govern- 
ment to do away with "the chains, iron cages and brutal 
keepers" he was generally regarded as a reckless visionary, 
almost an insane man himself. Nevertheless, he removed 
the chains from some fifty men at once, and the others sub- 
sequently, without a resulting accident or untoward event. 
Owing, no doubt, in part to unsettled political conditions 
in France at that time, this epoch-marking, dramatic inci- 
dent in the world's progress of humanity was not widely 
known or duly appreciated until after many years had 
elapsed. Meantime an English Quaker, William Tuke, 
becoming sorely distressed with the depleting and repressive 
methods to which the insane in the government asylums of 
Great Britain were subjected, founded at York, England, 
and at his own expense, a hospital for the insane where 
lunatics would be treated as sick people, and where gentle- 
ness and patience would, under all conditions, be exercised 
towards them. 

This humane innovation in lunatic asylum practice 
attracted considerable attention in England, and, although 
his "Retreat" was conducted without ostentation, but in 
the simple, quiet methods which characterized Quakerism, 
it aroused intense hostility, and its methods were denoimced 
and vilified, especially by those interested in the manage- 
ment of English asylums in which insane inmates continued 
to be treated according to the rigorous code of the conserv- 



APPENDIX I 323 

ative British authorities. Chains, straps, strait-jackets, 
threats, force, coercion, held sway in practically all public 
asylums, while the York Retreat continued its gentle and 
most successful Non- Restraint ministrations to the insane. 
No doubt theories and methods in many English asylums 
were in time somewhat modified by the influence of the 
York Retreat, but nowhere else were the efficient, advanced, 
Quaker principles adopted as the prevailing moral tone and 
force of an English institution prior to 1838, when at the 
Lincoln Asylum, Dr. Gardiner Hill, seconded by Dr. Charles- 
worth, endeavored to absolutely abolish mechanical re- 
straint. But their convictions were regarded as too radical 
by the authorities above them, and, as a consequence, they 
lost their situations as asylum ofl&cers. Yet the time for 
a revolution in lunatic hospital management was ripe and 
the requisite man, with masterful endowments, was at hand. 
In the following year, 1839, Dr. John ConoUy, without 
previous experience in such work, assumed control of the 
lunatic asylum at Hanwell, containing over eight hundred 
patients. For some years previously this asylum had been 
managed upon lines which were conspicuously mild for 
those days. In fact, "it was deservedly considered one of 
the best managed asylmns in England," and yet Dr. Conolly 
found there forty patients subjected to mechanical restraint, 
and, designed for such uses, about six hundred instruments, 
of one kind and another, half being leg locks and handcuffs, 
with forty coercion chairs. All these he collected in one 
room which was called the museum, and from that time no 
patient in Hanwell was subjected to mechanical restraint. 
In 1844 Dr. Conolly wrote as follows: "After five years' 
experience I have no hesitation in recording my opinion 
that with a well constituted governing body, animated by 
philanthropy, directed by intelligence and acting by means 



324 APPENDIX I 

of proper ofl&cers, there is no asylum in the world in which 
all mechanical restraint may not be abolished, not only with 
safety, but with incalculable advantage." Dr. Conolly 
abolished mechanical restraint, not simply because it was 
an inheritance from the prison regime to which the insane 
were formerly subjected, but more especially because it was 
the material embodiment of all prison policy — coercion. 
As an English authority has stated it, "what he sought was 
not only to abolish the tangible instruments of restraint, 
but to substitute the power of a superior mind, guided by 
unvarying kindness. He showed by reasoning, he proved 
by trial, and he enforced by all the high courage of his im- 
varying patience and his tender heart, the great principle 
that the insane are best governed by a law of kindness and 
that all coercion applied to them is not only unnecessary, 
but hurtful. The credit of first suggesting Non-Restraint 
does not belong to Conolly, but it has been well said the 
credit of originality is often due, not so much to the man 
who first suggests a thing as to him who suggests it in such 
a manner as to display its value; or, not so much to him 
who sets an example worthy of imitation as to him whose 
example compels imitation by its worth. What Conolly 
did was not merely to abolish restraint and torture within 
the sphere of his personal control, but to render their con- 
tinuance impossible within the limits of civilization. Under 
the influence of his example the fetters fell from the limbs 
of the lunatic in all English asylums. By example and 
precept, by tongue and pen, he labored without ceasing, 
in defence of the great principles involved, and he had the 
satisfaction of ultimately seeing the practice founded upon 
them, more or less closely copied in every asylum in England, 
and in many others located in various parts of Europe. He 
found the lunatic an object of dread and suspicious horror; 



APPENDIX I 325 

he left him an object of commiseration and kindness. He 
found insanity regarded as a disease of the mind, he left it 
recognized as a disease of the body. He found a madhouse 
a prison, and a place of torture without mercy; he left it a 
hospital for many and an asylum in fact, as well as in name, 
for all inmates." 

This great work, immeasurable in its continued and 
ultimate effects, was accomplished only as the result of the 
most painstaking personal application to detail in his own 
wards and a long continued battle for mercy and justice. 
Opposition to his theory and practice, some of it honest 
doubting, but much of it ignorant and bitter prejudice, 
sprang up and attacked him from all quarters. He met it 
first from his own country, from English asylum officials, 
and later from Continental critics. He met all opponents 
in the true Quaker spirit and his intelligence, his courage, 
and his sincerity triumphed, as such qualities always will, 
over error and ignorant prejudices. When his detractors 
could no longer maintain the commonly believed error that 
for mechanical restraint some substitute treatment no 
better, perhaps more reprehensible, was adopted, the asser- 
tion that Dr. ConoUy's patients were of a different, a milder 
type than those to be found in other asylums, was advanced. 
First, in Great Britain it was claimed that the Hanwell 
patients were a specially effeminate lot. Then when Non- 
Restraint became the general working policy of English 
asylums. Continental faultfinders asserted that English 
people were a more docile race than native Frenchmen or 
Germans. The same untenable assumption is often heard 
to this day in extenuation for the continual use of mechanical 
restraint in certain hospitals. It will be seriously stated 
that the original character of hospital populations varies 
from the mild to the aggressive in different sections of a 



326 APPENDIX I 

given country, or state, and possibly in contiguous districts, 
even. At Danvers mechanical restraint was abolished 
about four years earlier in the women's than in the men's 
wards, not because women patients are less difi&cult to man- 
age, but for the reasons that an arbitrary position on this 
question was not assumed by the superintendent at first, 
and because the assistant physicians and supervisors in the 
women's department were especially responsive to sugges- 
tions in this direction. Eventually, when Non-Restraint 
had permeated the whole hospital, and when the chief 
assistant who had been gradually convinced of the feasibility 
of Non-Restraint against his preconceived but honest con- 
victions, remarked in answer to some statement of fact, 
which was made one day, "Oh, it's a comparatively easy 
matter to avoid mechanical restraint now because we don't 
have the cases that require it as we formerly did." Then and 
there, the superintendent took occasion to point out that he 
had discovered exactly what every man brought into intimate 
association with Non-Restraint had discovered; namely, 
that Non-Restraint once established in an institution, con- 
ditions which formerly suggested its use rarely if ever occur; 
that, as institution after institution had been placed on the 
Non-Restraint basis, there had been a continuous, successive 
re-discovery of the same altered internal conditions, from 
the days of Conolly to the present time, a period of some 
fifty years. Such being the fact it must be admitted that 
this less fractious, less turbulent condition of the insane in 
the wards of the hospitals was always the outcome of Non- 
Restraint and never the forerunner. 

This discloses the real solution of the controversy. Where 
restraint is permitted the general spirit of the management 
breathes coercion; antagonism, enforced submission. When 
Non-Restraint is the undeviating rule, tact, persuasion, and 



APPENDIX I Z^l 

sympathy soften and mellow every act towards the inmates. 
The employment of mechanical restraint gives the attendants 
a wrong sense of their personal power over patients, such a 
physical advantage that they instinctively inchne to self- 
assertion; to issue peremptory commands; to use ill-con- 
sidered, irritating speech; to give curt answers; to make 
threats; in short, to attempt to intimidate aU but the most 
quiet patients. " Do thus, or so, or you will be sent to the 
back wards, you will be secluded, or you will be put in a 
strait- jacket," is the natural style of speech adopted by 
attendants when threats and penalties are at their command. 
Having thus threatened a penalty, the average uninstructed 
attendant concludes that proper hospital discipline demands 
its infliction unless the excited, frightened patient meekly 
capitulates, a result one could hardly expect with a sane 
person, much less with a deranged, apprehensive lunatic. 
Even well meaning attendants naturally fall into such errors 
unless carefully drilled and faithfully watched. Fresh re- 
cruits are constantly entering the nursing service, and only 
by individual work with them can the highest ideals of a 
qualified nurse be instilled into their minds. 

I cannot imderstand how the superintendent of an insane 
asylum can satisfactorily regulate the use of mechanical 
restraint if he permits its use. He may reserve to himself 
the decision as to whether or not it shall be used in each 
case. But the chances are that he only learns of the final 
links in the long chain of circumstances which connect the 
special overt acts of the patient with some affair, trivial it 
may be, that originated the trouble, and which, by inju- 
dicious treatment from the attendants, ultimately assumed 
serious phases. Under such conditions the supervising 
medical officer, when he authorizes the use of restraining 
apparatus, simply endorses the judgment of the attendants. 



328 APPENDIX I 

Let it be understood that restraint can be used only in ex- 
ceptional cases, and exceptional cases will be brought to his 
attention too frequently. 

An eminent English authority has recorded his convic- 
tions that "there can be no real compromise between the 
frequent use of mechanical restraint and its entire abolition. 
One system or the other must predominate in every asylum." 
In managing the insane the first impulse of the attendant 
is to assume authority or superiority, and give commands 
or orders, often with a penalty for disobedience expressed 
or implied. When the Non- Restraint principle is adopted, 
attendants are imder no temptation to utter such threats. 
Thus, they are dispossessed in advance of that which, in the 
great majority of cases, occasions troublesome friction 
between themselves and the patient. When driving patients 
is out of the question, attendants must induce or lead them. 
They must exercise the art of persuasion, of pleasing, of 
soothing. Thus fears will be allayed, confidence will be 
gained, and a relation of helpfulness and friendship be 
established. In such arts the capacity of the individual 
nurse varies; but all who approach patients in the right 
spirit, with the desire to befriend which qualifies attitude, 
tone of voice, choice of words, expression of the eye and use 
of the hands, can demonstrate the power of a kindly dis- 
posed, orderly mind over a disordered intellect. No doubt 
there are insane patients who would suffer no personal 
injury, mental or physical, by the application of restraining 
apparatus. Indeed, I am willing to concede that cases may 
arise where, could their management be absolutely dis- 
sociated in its influence from aU others, mechanical restraint 
might be the most expedient treatment. But, in an institu- 
tion for the insane, it should be only the last resort, since 
so much for the general good of the inmates depends upon 



APPENDIX I 329 

the nursing morale of the hospital, and the demoralizing 
ill effects of exceptions to the Non-Restraint rule are so 
pernicious and wide reaching, that officials or nurses should 
use mechanical restraint only when satisfied beyond ques- 
tion that its use or neglect would determine the life or death 
of the patient. 

Perhaps I speak with assurance, but I worked out this 
problem at Danvers, where mechanical restraint was abol- 
ished deliberately. As has been stated, its use was dis- 
continued in the female wards four or five years before it 
was whoUy given up in the male department. The annual 
report of the Danvers Insane Hospital for 1897 contains 
comments upon this subject. To quote: "I am aware that 
many persons regard Non-Restraint in lunatic hospitals as a 
fad of enthusiasts. I often hear this subject discussed in 
such terms, or dismissed with such indifference, that I infer 
comparatively few physicians even view this question from 
our standpoint, and therefore deem it proper to explain why 
mechanical restraint is abolished at Danvers. Mechanical 
restraint may be, and certainly is, used occasionally upon 
patients in general hospitals with no injurious consequences; 
but conditions in general hospitals and lunatic hospitals 
are so dissimilar, this fact proves little. I formerly per- 
mitted the use of restraining apparatus upon patients, en- 
deavoring to limit its use to rare and exceptional cases. 
While working under this policy, I not only found it difficult 
to decide upon cases, and to convince the nurses that restraint 
was seldom necessary, but every exception in favor of me- 
chanical restraint seemed to weaken the courage and resolu- 
tion of the nurses, as well as to diminish my influence and 
control over them. Then, too, as long as nurses imderstood 
that straps and jackets could be employed as final measures, 
they not only relinquished mild efforts too quickly, but were 



33© APPENDIX I 

inclined to assume a dictatorial, oppressive manner towards 
patients upon slight occasions; and this spirit of coercion 
as evinced by the nurse in his or her attitude towards the 
patient was, according to my observation, the starting-point 
of the trouble with refractory patients in the great majority 
of cases. 

*'Now that mechanical restraint is discarded, the nurses 
understand that they will be regarded as incompetent unless 
they can manage the patients in their charge without resort 
to violent measures, seclusion and restraint. Intelligent 
nurses do not complain of such restrictions. They appear 
ambitious to demonstrate that a trained nurse can manage 
the insane without the fetters and instruments which are 
relied upon in such cases by the unprofessional keeper. 
Certainly, the Non-Restraint rule has advanced a kindly, 
humane spirit in our wards as no other measures could have 
done. Nurses have no temptation or power to control 
patients by threats of punishment. Under such conditions, 
whatever native tact, art, and persuasive powers the nurse 
may possess are rapidly developed; and, as a result, more 
sympathetic, friendly relations are early established between 
nurse and patient, and the common annoyances and irrita- 
tions formerly experienced by both parties are largely avoided. 
The beneficial effects thus ensuing, when considered in the 
aggregate, are of such magnitude, I am resolved that the 
Non-Restraint rule shall not be broken except as a last 
resort, as a life-saving measure." 

Since that time, I have been responsible for the custody 
and treatment of more than six thousand insane persons, 
not one of whom was restrained with mechanical appliances 
by my orders or within my knowledge. Because a former 
superintendent purchased restraining apparatus and ex- 
perimented with it upon not more than two patients and for 



J 



APPENDIX I 331 

a period not exceeding one week, according to reports, the 
makers of such apparatus continue to circulate a statement 
that the Dan vers Asylum is one of their patrons, I have 
seen patients who in their quiet moments requested that, 
in their recurring attacks of excitement, a strait-jacket 
might be applied. But, in such cases, I have found there 
existed a morbid, hysterical element, which, when properly 
treated, did not develop the frenzied periods the patient had 
come to expect and dread. I have dealt with trying subjects. 
A native of West India was once transferred to Danvers 
from another state institution, because, if the nurse who 
conducted the transfer knew the facts and stated them, 
"they could not manage her." "But you have had her in 
restraint," I said. "Oh, yes," the nurse rephed, "she has 
been let out of restraint only two hours a day." This 
patient was destructive, suicidal, and vicious. She re- 
mained in the Danvers hospital three years and nine months, 
and was never restrained there by the aid of mechanical 
appliances. In time, she greatly improved; she took her 
meals for a considerable period in our congregate dining 
room, and for a time before leaving was granted limited 
parole of the grounds. I confess that the case of this patient, 
who was epileptic, therefore hopeless as far as recovery was 
concerned, was a severe tax upon the mental and physical 
conditions of both officers and nurses, greater, perhaps, 
than the results to this single individual warranted. But 
the Non-Restraint principle, the animus of an ideal hospital 
regime was at stake, and its preservation was, in my opinion, 
worth all it cost. Besides, I regard the self-sacrificing care, 
the sympathy and the patience exercised by the nurses who 
accomplished such excellent results in this case, as examples 
of moral heroism, quite as creditable as many that have 
received public approbation and medals of honor; and who 



332 APPENDIX I 

will put a price on moral heroism? Besides, what official 
or nurse, imbued with proper pride in his or her profession, 
is willing to admit that science, training, and skill have no 
methods with the insane superior to those instinctively sug- 
gested to the mind of an inexperienced, imeducated layman ? 
Too much emphasis cannot be put in the assertion that it is 
less the machinery employed in mechanical restraint than 
the spirit of coercion, which its employment fosters, that 
should be abolished from an insane hospital. 

A prominent general practitioner of medicine once re- 
marked to me, "This talk about Non-Restraint is all rot; we 
use it at times in our general hospital." This gentleman did 
not appreciate that the relationship existing between patient 
and nurse in the general hospital differs widely from that 
necessarily established in the insane hospital. He did not 
take into account the fact that, in the general hospital, 
where every act of the nurse is imder the constant watch 
of rational observers, the use of restraint is safe-guarded as 
it cannot be in the insane hospital wards. Nor did he com- 
prehend this important distinction, that in the general 
hospital, the chief end to accomplish by restraint is the 
control of the patient; while in the insane hospital, the 
prime requisite for the highest success in management is 
the intelligent self-control of the nurse. 

The argument against mechanical restraint applies in 
large measure to seclusion of the insane. While seclusion 
is, in some degree, less demoralizing in its effects or its in- 
fluence upon the nursing staff of an institution, only in rare 
and exceptional cases, can its employment be remedial or 
beneficial. If, as ConoUy said, "Restraint is Neglect," 
it is doubly true that seclusion is neglect. If used, it should 
never be prolonged. As a rule, thirty minutes' seclusion 
is worth, as a corrective measure, more than twenty-four 



APPENDIX I 333 

hours of the same treatment. Next to execution, solitary 
confinement is the severest doom that legal tribunals can 
pronounce upon hardened criminals. Solitary confinement 
is universally considered to be painfully trying to a sane 
mind. How can it be improving to a deranged man, shut 
away from associations with human beings, incapable of 
comprehending the logic of his position, consumed by de- 
lusions or burning with revengeful indignation towards the 
authors of his imaginary wrongs ? 

Can all the insane be managed without restraint or seclu- 
sion? Conolly always said " Yes " to that question. When, 
after consulting with him, superintendents of other institu- 
tions remarked that they would return home and try Non- 
Restraint in their asylums, he would coolly reply, *'You 
will succeed if you are in earnest." Some Continental 
hospital officials were well-nigh exasperated by Conolly's 
calm, significant, qualified prediction, "You will succeed if 
you are in earnest." He had been in earnest. In order to 
attain his ends at Hanwell, he had devoted a surprising 
amount of personal attention to each trying, difficult patient, 
visiting such both by day and night, watching the conduct 
of attendants towards such cases with unceasing vigilance. 
Superintendents who hope to accomplish results which 
made his name famous as a philanthropic physician and skil- 
ful asylum manager must imitate the example of Conolly to 
the extent, at least, of giving considerable personal attention 
to those patients whose conduct taxes the patience and wits 
of the nurses. The successful management of the turbulent 
insane without restraining apparatus cannot be accomplished 
by simply forbidding its employment. 

Rules to meet the exigency of every possible situation 
cannot be formulated in advance, since the various patients 
will present such dissimilar, unexpected and individual 



334 APPENDIX I 

features of difficulty. Therefore, the hospital rule maker, 
the commanding official, must intimately share with the 
nurses the labor and responsibility which trying cases force 
upon the management. I believe it is an important part 
of the system of instruction that each instance of friction 
between nurse and patient receive consideration from the 
superintendent, and, if thought best, that the involved nurse 
be commended when she acted judiciously, or be admonished 
when evidently failing to exercise due art as a trained nurse. 
When the position of the nurse was faulty, the better way 
should be pointed out. Such methods teach, and the 
physician who adopts them is soon able to identify those 
nurses who have special aptitude for their work, and can 
select for the difficult posts those best qualified for the 
trying duties. Nurses who possess self-poise, capacity for 
tact, and power to rapidly conceive expedients will naturall}^ 
succeed. I have seen slender, light-weight girls manage 
the hardest wards quite as well as those of large stature. 
As an aid towards the development of such nurses at Danvers, 
each ward is supplied with special report slips to be used 
according to directions printed on each slip; viz., "When a 
patient escapes; attempts to escape; receives an injury, 
accidentally or otherwise ; has to be handled with force, or 
is secluded; the attendant engaged in the affair, or the one 
in charge of the patient at the time, must send a written 
report to the medical officer in charge of the ward in which 
the patient belongs, who will countersign the same and for- 
ward it to the office of the superintendent." At a con- 
venient time, the patients thus reported are visited by the 
superintendent with the slip in hand, when such personal 
investigation and instructions as may seem necessary can 
be given. 

Being in earnest is the solution of the Non-Restraint ques- 



APPENDIX I 335 

tion. The ruling authority over and above the nursing staff 
must be in earnest; and this signifies clear insight as to 
the evil done and its remedy; certainty as to what can 
be done with the insane by virtue of patience, sympathy 
and tact; with determination, watchfulness, faith and en-' 
thusiasm. 



APPENDIX II 

A PAMPHLET issued by the Department of Commerce 
and Labor, May 22, 1905, under the head "Daily Con- 
sular Report, No. 2264," contains an article by Hon. Frank 
H. Mason, then Consul- General at Berlin, Germany. It 
is entitled "Modern Hospital for the Insane," and reads as 
follows : 

"Among the valuable lessons which most other nations 
can advantageously learn from the experience and practice 
of Germany is the scientific treatment of insanity in its 
incipient stages as a physical and possibly curable disease. 

"Notwithstanding the rapid and deplorable increase of 
mental diseases which has followed the stress and strain 
of modern business and social life, it must be admitted that 
in the United States, and even in Great Britain, govern- 
mental beneficence has not progressed beyond the eleemosy- 
nary function of providing asylums in which the more or less 
hopelessly incurable victims of insanity, who have become 
a burden and menace to their friends, can drag out in safety 
and physical comfort the remnants of their stricken lives. 
If here and there a private clinic has made a hopeful begin- 
ning with the pathological treatment of mental diseases, 
it has been due to individual initiative, and the ministra- 
tions of such institutions are restricted mainly to patients 
of the well-to-do class, leaving the great majority of poor 
unfortunates to drift on to a stage of mental alienation in 
which they become dangerous to themselves and to those 

336 



APPENDIX II ZZ1 

about them, and therefore entitled to the attention and 
support of the State. Germany has taken a long and im- 
portant step beyond this, and to give a simple statement of 
the means employed and some of the results attained is the 
motive and purpose of the present report. 

"There are in this country twenty- two psychiatrical 
clinics or hospitals for the treatment of mental diseases. 
Most advanced and worthy of study are those located at 
Kiel, Giessen, Strassburg, Berlin, and, latest and most im- 
portant of all, the new clinic at Munich, which, in all that 
relates to perfection of equipment and arrangement as well 
as to the scientific enlightenment of methods employed, 
stands undoubtedly at the head of all institutions of its class 
in this or any other country. 

"In his forthcoming treatise on the treatment of mental 
disease Dr. Stewart Paton of Johns Hopkins University, 
to whose suggestion and kind assistance this report is prima- 
rily due, states the essential conditions and requirements of 
a modern hospital for the insane as follows : 

"i. Ease of access. The institution should be near to 
or within the limits of a city. 

"2. A limited capacity, in order that every individual 
may be made the subject of special study. 

"3. Perfect construction, equipment, and organization, 
in order that a thorough and energetic treatment can be 
undertaken for all patients for whom there is hope of re- 
covery. 

"4. A relatively large staff of physicians and nurses. 

"5. Ample provision not only for the teaching of students, 
but also for the prosecution of post-graduate investigations 
and research in clinical psychiatry, psychopathology, and in 
anatomy and pathology of the nervous system. 

"6. The ready admission of patients and their prompt 
23 



338 APPENDIX II 

transference, when necessary, to other more appropriate 
institutions and provisions for outdoor and voluntary pa- 
tients.^ 

"The Psychiatrical Clinic at Munich fulfils, to a degree 
probably not elsewhere attained, all these requirements and 
conditions. It was built by the city of Munich at a cost of 
$500,000. It is conveniently located and accessible; it is in 
close touch with the medical department of a leading uni- 
versity; and it has for its field of usefulness a city of 580,000 
peoples ..' It has accommodations for iio bed patients of both 
sexes, besides a large dispensary on the ground floor for the 
treatment of voluntary patients who come in at stated periods, 
but live otherwise at home. Although opened only a few 
months ago, the clinic will have treated not less than 2,000 
patients before the close of its first year. 

"The edifice . . . was completed last year, and includes 
the central or administration building, with two wings, which 
form the front and sides of an open court or garden. In 
the central structure are located laboratories for pathologi- 
cal, chemical, and psychological studies, a fine medical 
library, rooms for the reception and examination of patients, 
and the private rooms of the director. The apparatus and 
facilities for every form of research connected with any 
question relating to preventing, detecting, and curing in- 
sanity are as elaborate and perfect as experience and up-to- 
date science can suggest. 

"Among various special features are bathrooms, arranged 
with tubs in which the water can be maintained indefinitely 
at a given temperature, and in which excited patients may 
be kept without restraint for hours, to splash at will or even 

* For detailed description of a modem Psychopathic Hospital see 
"Psychiatry" (Chapter VI), by Stewart Paton, M.D., published 1905, by 
J. B. Lippincott Company. 



APPENDIX II 339 

to sleep, using rubber air cushions as pillows — a soothing 
and highly efficacious form of treatment at certain stages of 
mental disease. A small iron door in the wall opens into an 
oven, in which hot towels are always within reach, to be used 
in rubbing down the patient on leaving the bath. 

"A ward of the ordinary size contains space for from five 
to ten beds and has among its equipment a small electric 
cooking stove for heating water or milk, preparing eggs, 
toast, and other food, a movable bathtub on casters, and 
electric lights that can be so controlled as to give any desired 
degree of illumination. 

"The lecture room has accommodations for two hundred 
and forty students, and is lighted by incandescent electric 
lamps so placed as to project the light upward against a 
white ceiling, so as to give a clear, but mild, diffused light, 
strong enough for every purpose, but without glare. If, 
during a day lecture the professor wishes to use kinetoscope 
or magic lantern illustrations he touches a button, and black 
shades running in grooves at each window, drop and make 
the interior dark. Another knob is touched and the kineto- 
scope or lantern picture is thrown upon the screen and the 
lecture proceeds without a moment's interruption. 

"The hospital is not free. Patients are divided accord- 
ing to their means into three classes, but the treatment and 
medical services are precisely the same to all, according to 
their condition and necessities. Patients of the first, second, 
and third classes pay respectively $2.38, $1.36, and 71 cents 
per day, everything included. Absolutely no restraint is 
used. All the wards are perfectly warmed, ventilated, and 
lighted; the walls are of bright, cheerful colors and hung 
with cheap but good pictures that appeal to a correct artistic 
taste. In the comer of each occupied ward is a seat for a 
nurse at a table provided with an electric light so arranged 



340 APPENDIX II 

that she may read without disturbing the patients. In the 
wall are three small niches, each covered with a locked iron 
panel or door, to which the nurse has the key. By unlocking 
one of these doors electric light is turned on throughout the 
ward, either suddenly or gradually, as may be desired. 
Opening the second door calls the director or house physi- 
cian, and the third is a time recorder, by opening which at 
brief stated intervals the nurse records on a dial in the 
director's office the fact that he or she has been awake and 
in constant attendance. 

"The medical staff of the Munich Psychiatrical Clinic 
includes as director Prof. Dr. Emil Kraepelin, one of the 
foremost German specialists in mental diseases; First Assist- 
ant Physician Doctor Gaupp, and Doctor Altzheimer, 
assistant physician and director of the laboratory. These 
and two other assistant physicians are paid; the others are 
young physicians who receive for their services free board 
and lodging, but no other compensation. The educational 
advantages offered by the clinic form one of its most valuable 
assets. These include oral and clinical instruction not only 
to medical students, but to practicing physicians who wish 
to become competent practitioners or specialists in mental 
diseases, and to lawyers who seek to specially qualify them- 
selves for practice in the large and unfortunately growing 
class of cases that involve questions of mental responsibility. 
The clinic also serves as a tribunal of highest authority to de- 
termine the condition of patients who are involved by charges 
or litigation which hinge on the fact or degree of mental ab- 
erration. Such a patient is kept under expert observation 
and subjected to tests that finally give a definite diagnosis of 
his condition, which is no longer left to be decided by the 
academic "opinion of a medical expert, caught by the artful 
hypothetical questions of a shrewd opposing attorney. 



APPENDIX II 341 

"Thus constructed, equipped and administered the 
modern psychiatrical clinic in Germany meets and fulfils 
two fundamental needs that exist in greater or less degree 
in every city or large town in the United States, namely, 
that of better facilities for the skilful treatment, care, and 
possible cure of cases of incipient and acute insanity; and, 
secondly, adequate provision for instruction in treatment 
and in the investigation of practical problems upon the solu- 
tion of which must depend the arrest of increasing insanity 
among the people of the State. Its inestimable service to 
the community is that it provides for saving an indefinite 
but considerable percentage of the victims of incipient 
mental disease, and restores them to lives of usefulness, 
instead of leaving them to degenerate into a menace to 
society and a burden to the State. It provides the most 
consummate examination and treatment at a stage of the 
disease when there is the most chance of averting or arrest- 
ing an attack of real insanity. It detects and takes timely 
charge of the smaller but important class of patients who, 
without the knowledge of their friends, are on the border 
line of insanity, and liable at any time to become suddenly 
dangerous to themselves or others. 

"Its beneficent fimction is the prompt application of every 
known resource of detection and prevention to the whole 
insidious group of mental diseases which have become a 
penalty of the intense, over-wrought life of modern society, 
or are induced by poverty, self-indulgence, or inherited 
tendencies. Public benevolence and private philanthropy 
can fulfil no higher or more valuable purpose than to bring 
the ultimate resources of science to the support of a cause 
like this. 

"Frank H. Mason, Consul-General." 
Berlin, Germany, April 8, 1905. 



APPENDIX III 

In a report issued July, 1906, by the Department of 
Commerce and Labor, under the heading: "Insane and 
Feeble-minded in Hospitals and Institutions 1904," the 
following illuminating facts appear : 

"On June i, 1890, there were in the United States 74,028 
insane patients distributed among 162 hospitals, of which 
119 were public (maintained, as shown elsewhere in the 
report, at an annual expense of $10,595,567), and 43 private 
institutions. On December 31, 1903 (less than fourteen 
years later) there were in the United States 150,151 insane 
patients distributed among 328 hospitals, of which 226 were 
public (maintained, as shown elsewhere in the report, at an 
annual expense of $21,327,228.41) and 102 private institu- 
tions." This "increase of more than 100 per cent in the 
number of insane in hospitals, being accompanied by a 
corresponding increase in the number of institutions in- 
volved. . . . According to the best information available 
only 20 of the present state hospitals for the insane in the 
United States were established prior to 1850. ... To this 
number 17 hospitals were added in the decade 1850 to 1859; 
18, in the decade i860 to 1869; 26, in the decade 1870 to 
1879; and 33, in the decade 1880 to 1889. During the last 
decade the growth of private asylums for the insane has also 
been very marked. The number given in this report is 
more than double that returned in 1890. . . . That this 
movement toward hospitals for the insane has probably not 
reached its height may be inferred from the fact that com- 

342 



APPENDIX III 343 

mitments were relatively more frequent in the years com- 
prised in the second half of the period 1890 to 1903 than in 
those included in the first half." The government compiler 
then admits that the ratio of actual increase for the whole 
country is not in reality as much as 100 per cent — but 
notice what follows: "While it is probable that relatively a 
much smaller number of insane escape institutional restraint 
than some twenty years ago — otherwise the accumulation 
in hospitals would be inexplicable — it is indisputable that 
even at the present time there are thousands who, although 
recognizable as insane, have not been placed in the care 
of hospitals or other institutions for that class. To offer 
any estimate of the probable number of insane that would 
have been disclosed by an investigation which included 
those not in institutions in addition to those in hospitals on 
December 31, 1903, would be a mere guess. But it is cer- 
tainly within the truth to say that there were as many on 
that date as were found outside of hospitals in 1890, or some 
30,000. In 1903 the number of insane in hospitals per 
100,000 of population exceeded by 16.2 the ratio of all in- 
sane to population in 1890. ... At the end of the decade 
1880 to 1890, the number of insane in hospitals had increased 
from 40,942 to 74,028 or 33,086, and the number of insane 
per 100,000 of population had risen from 81.6 to 118.2, or 
36.6. In 1903, thirteen years later, the number of insane 
in hospitals had further increased by 76,123 patients, or 
more than the number found in 1890, and the number per 
100,000 of population had increased by 68. These figures 
are, of course, for the most part merely illustrative of the 
larger utilization of hospitals for the treatment of the insane, 
and not direct proof of a corresponding increase of insanity. 
... If the enumeration of 1903 had been made to include 
the insane outside of the hospital population it is evident 



344 APPENDIX III 

that larger ratios than those for 1890 would probably have 
been shown for each state and territory. But even without 
the inclusion of this class, a comparison of the ratio of insane 
in hospitals in 1903 with the ratio of total insane counted in 
1890 shows that relatively the insane in the United States 
have increased faster than the population. This conclusion 
is further substantiated by comparing the returns for 1903 
with those for 1880. The completeness of the census of 
1880 has not been questioned, so far as the enumeration of 
the institutional population is concerned, and it was far 
more thorough than that of 1890 in regard to the insane 
outside of institutions, owing to the active participation of 
physicians in making returns of this class. A comparison 
of the ratios of insane in hospitals on December 31, 1903, 
with the ratios of total insane both in and outside of hospitals 
in 1880, shows that there was an increase in the ratio not only 
for the United States, but for 31 out of the 47 states and 
territories included in the census of 1880; and that the in- 
crease in ratios was much larger in most of these 31 states 
than in the country as a whole. . . . From whatever point 
the matter is viewed the census returns since 1880 permit 
but one conclusion, namely that the rate of increase is greater 
for the insane in the United States than it is for the general 
population. It is impossible, however, to determine the 
difference between these rates until provision is made for 
an enumeration of the insane, no matter whether found in 
or outside of institutions. Although the hospital returns 
tell a one-sided story, they invariably point to an increase 
in the prevalence of insanity. . . . Although it seems im- 
possible to determine definitely whether insanity is increas- 
ing or not from the percentage of admissions and discharges, 
deaths and transfers for a single year, the niunerical excess 
of admissions over discharges, deaths and transfers during 



APPENDIX III 345 

1904, when compared with the increase in number of insane 
in hospitals during the past thirteen years, indicates that the 
accumulation of insane in hospitals is probably progressing, 
at least as rapidly as ever before." 



APPENDIX IV 

Pavilion F, A Department for Mental Diseases of 
THE Albany Hospital. Delivered before the 
Thirty-fourth National Conference of Charities 
AND Correction, at Minneapolis, Minn., June i8, 
1907. 

BY J. MONTGOMERY MOSHER, M.D. 

Attending Specialist in Mental Diseases, Albany Hospital, Albany, N.Y. 
[Reprinted from the Proceedings.] 

On the sixth of December, 1899, seven physicians of 
Albany, New York, petitioned the board of supervisors of 
the county to erect a "building for the temporary care 
of insane patients," directing attention to the fact that "the 
process of commitment to a hospital for the insane is com- 
plicated and often requires several days, during which time 
the patient may be protected by his friends as best they can, 
or, in event of active manifestations of insanity, endanger- 
ing himself or others, be placed in the jail." The petition 
was favorably considered and a law was enacted appropriat- 
ing eighteen thousand dollars "for the construction and 
furnishing of a reception pavilion in connection with the 
Albany Hospital, for the detention and care of persons 
afflicted with nervous and mental disorders." The Albany 
Hospital is a private corporation, under the administration 
of a board of governors, elected annually by subscribers, 
built on land granted by the city, and providing wards for 
the care of both private and public patients. The erection 

346 



APPENDIX IV 347 

of the so-called "Reception Pavilion" was contingent upon 
"a contract between the Albany Hospital and the County 
of Albany, that the said hospital will maintain and manage 
the said pavilion, and will agree to receive and accept for 
detention or treatment in said pavilion, all public patients 
from this county or any of the cities or towns thereof, upon 
the same terms as public patients are received and cared for 
from the various towns of this county, at such hospital." 

The conditions leading to this action were particularly 
painful. The insane of the State of New York are main- 
tained by a State law. The State is divided into hospital 
districts, Albany being in the district of the Hudson River 
State Hospital at Poughkeepsie, distant seventy-five miles. 
There was no opportunity for the treatment of a case of in- 
sanity other than by a commitment to this hospital. The 
commitment is a complicated legal process, consisting of a 
petition by any person with whom the patient may reside, 
by the nearest available relative or by a proper public official, 
annexed to the certificate by two qualified physicians, of an 
examination to have been made jointly within ten days 
before the granting of an order, and to contain a statement 
of "the facts and circumstances upon which the judgment 
of the physicians is based, and show that the condition of 
the person is such as to require care and treatment in an 
institution for the care, custody and treatment of the in- 
sane." The petition and certificate, properly verified, con- 
stitute the application, notice of which "shall be served 
personally, at least one day before making such applica- 
tion, upon the person alleged to be insane." If the judge 
to whom such application is made is "satisfied that the 
alleged insane person is insane," he may "issue an order 
for the commitment of such person," or he may, "in his 
discretion, require other proofs." 



348 APPENDIX IV 

A later amendment to this law provides for "emergency 
cases," who need "immediate care and treatment," or who 
are "dangerously insane," and may be received in an insti- 
tution upon the certificate of lunacy and petition for five 
days pending the judicial order. 

In brief, a patient who is suffering from disease of the 
mind, the most threatening calamity of life, must be so far 
advanced in the disease and so disordered in action or in 
speech as to satisfy a lay tribunal of the necessity or justi- 
fication of the forcible deprivation of his liberty, must be told 
that he is "insane," must be "adjudged insane," and "com- 
mitted" by a court to an institution for the insane, before 
he can receive the treatment best adapted to the restoration 
of his health. 

In so far as the "Insanity Law" of New York relates to 
the care, custody or protection of the insane, it is definite 
and effective ; but as an obstacle to the prompt early 
treatment of mental disease, it must be regarded as a 
medical barbarism. This discrimination against the mental 
patient places him in a different Hght than the sufferer from 
a physical ailment, although the pathological processes are 
more delicate and intricate and demand the most painstaking 
consideration. It is impossible to conceive of a patient with 
pneumonia or a broken leg applying to a court of law for 
medical or surgical care, but such is the necessity of a mental 
case. 

The man who has overtaxed his nervous system suffers 
first from insomnia. Insomnia is a manifestation of irri- 
tability, which is the earliest expression of exhaustion. It 
indicates that the excessive momentum of the work of the 
day is carried into the night, and that normal relaxation and 
recuperation do not follow. The train of thought is beyond 
voluntary control, and this automatic mental activity soon con- 



APPENDIX IV 349 

tinues throughout the day and night. The patient states that 
his thoughts are "running away with him." He is also con- 
scious of inabiUty to concentrate his attention, which, as a 
layman, he usually describes as loss of memory. This 
mental unrest early becomes a source of anxiety, and the 
attempt is unfortunately made to obtain relief by sedatives; 
the overshadowing symptom of irritabihty is treated and 
the underlying pathological state of exhaustion ignored. 
The result is disaster. The use of debihtating drugs upon 
an already depleted organism intensifies the condition, 
interferes with function, obstructs the secretions, prevents 
metabolism, and the products of decomposition accumulate 
as poisons, to add their damaging effects. Strange thoughts 
and fancies fill the mind of the patient, of the extraordinary 
character of which he is partially or at times fully con- 
scious, and of which he is willing to accept an explanation. 
This is the point of progress of the ailment which has been 
described as the ** borderland of insanity." It is the true 
psychological moment at which a misstep may precipitate 
disaster, and proper treatment may avert a long and dan- 
gerous illness. The family look upon the patient with 
apprehension and with awe. The actions, manner and 
characteristics of one dearly beloved are changing and his 
companions are not educated to the interpretation or man- 
agement of the altered personality. Evasion, indirection, 
deception, falsehood, contradiction, chiding and even vio- 
lence, bewilder the patient, intensify his irritabihty and con- 
firm his doubts, when the simple truth, a frank revelation 
to him of the morbid origin of his fancies — the only source 
of mental rehef — is almost never spoken. They appreciate 
the mental disorder, its threatening aspect and possibilities, 
but stand in awe of the formidable judicial declaration of 
insanity. The opprobrium attached to a confession of 



350 APPENDIX IV 

mental obliquity weighs more heavily than the desire for 
relief. Delay and mismanagement follow imtil the patient, 
dehrious and desperate, has committed some oflfence against 
the law, or has become flagrantly incompetent, when, often 
too late, he is placed in the hands of physicians who under- 
stand his condition and are trained in the use of therapeutic 
measures for reUef. 

The shock of it all is frightful. In this age of ideals and 
stress, many who strive for the highest rewards of cultivation 
of the nervous system, the attainment of a lofty ambition, 
suffer moments of fatigue and depression, the penalty of 
overwork. The impending calamity, in which individuaUty 
is felt to be sHpping away and merging into incompetency 
and lunacy, is apprehended and feared. Relief is sought, 
too often in vain, for men and measures are not provided. 
Here lies the opportunity of individual prophylaxis, and here, 
between the home and the asylum, the general hospital 
may ihtervene. 

Fortunately for the proposed project, conditions at the 
Albany hospital were peculiarly favorable. A new institu- 
tion had been constructed, consisting of a series of buildings 
on either side of a central corridor or axis, providing wards 
for pubHc and private patients, an operating theater, 
nurses' house and administration. The paviHon for mental 
cases was placed in the rear of the nurses' house, distant 
from the general wards, and from the pubUcity of the 
central corridor. 

The floor plan was designed with an eye to the needs of 
aU classes of patients. It was anticipated that both tur- 
bulent and quiet cases would be received, and that the 
comfort of each must be promoted. There were two depart- 
ments, separated by a heavy partition wall and double doors, 
in the rear of which were two guarded rooms, where noise 



APPENDIX IV 351 

might be confined. At the end of the first year it was found 
that this provision was inadequate and the rear section was 
enlarged to provide ten rooms, with a day room or sitting 
room on each floor. Six of these rooms were approached by 
a communicating cross hall, so that the disturbed patients 
are removed from the general ward. This plan serves the 
double purpose of adequate provision for the excited patient 
and protection for others. Shouting, rattling of doors and 
windows, striking the walls, are manifestations of mental 
disorder just as elevation of temperature is a symptom of 
fever, and mental disorder, as fever, is often self-limiting. 
The patient should be placed under proper conditions and 
carried inteUigently through the attack. Excretion of waste 
products is to be promoted, the state of nutrition improved, 
and normal functional activity of the organism restored. 
These are medical problems of transcendent importance 
and direct the attention and the therapeutic efforts to the 
patient himself. Methods sought to be justified under 
the vicious plea of expediency are anticipated, and forcible 
suppression of symptoms is avoided unless for his good. 
Harmful sedatives and other coercive measures for pre- 
venting disturbance are too often used, to the detriment of 
the patient and for the benefit of others. 

The first consideration is consequently architectural, and 
Pavilion F has been so constructed as to afford means of 
isolation and, at the same time, proper personal attendance. 
Much of its best work has been accomplished in the treat- 
ment of acute cases of a very active character; and such 
cases, when properly managed, afford the quickest and most 
satisfactory recoveries, and have a legitimate claim upon 
the general hospital. 

The administration of Pavilion F is based upon that of 
the other departments, except that the attending physician 



352 APPENDIX IV 

has continuous service and is held to strict accountability 
to the governors of the hospital. He visits at least once a 
day, and exercises supervision and medical power. For a 
few months after its opening the pavilion received patients 
in the care of other physicians, but this was soon found to 
threaten disturbance, discord, and even danger, from both 
medical and legal points of view, and concentration of re- 
sponsibility was inevitable. The physicians of the com- 
munity have generally co-operated with the hospital, and 
have assisted in the management of critical cases, realizing 
the greater difficulties experienced before the creation of 
this department, and the deHcate questions involved. 

The attending physician is assisted by two internes on 
the medical service, whose duties are the taking of histories 
and examination of the patients under his direction. The 
greatest instrument for good, however, is the nursing care. 

Some ninety nurses are under training in the hospital. 
The course is of three years and includes every department. 
In PaviHon F at least ten weeks are required, on day and 
night duty on the men's and women's wards. The pupil 
nurses are directed and supervised by the head nurse, who 
is a woman of experience in mental work, co-operates with 
the training school, is a part of it, and is an assistant to the 
superintendent of nurses. 

The standard of nursing is that established by the hospi- 
tal, and this in turn reflects the requirements of the most 
exacting patronage of the community. The service given 
by the nurses in the mental department has proved the 
most substantial factor in establishing its high ideals. Nor 
is the pavilion under an excess of obligation, as educational 
elements are supplied which count largely in the equipment 
of the nurse for the work in general medicine and surgery. 
Clinical instruction is also given to the students of the 



APPENDIX IV 353 

Albany Medical College, who attend a weekly bedside 
course during the college year. 

At the end of five years this experiment in the therapeutics 
of mental medicine is thought worthy of a report to the 
National Conference of Charities and Correction. Facts 
and experience have accumulated to justify a statement as 
to whether an actual advance has been made in the most 
diflficult and least understood department of practice; or 
whether, as is unfortunately too often the case in medicine, 
as well as in dress, a fashion has been introduced to 
indulge a passing fancy. 

From February i8, 1902, the day of the first admission, 
to February 28, 1907, one thousand and thirty-one patients 
have entered this building. Of these five hundred and 
ninety-six have returned to their homes recovered or im- 
proved, three hundred and sixteen have remained stationary, 
and eighty-six have died. Two hundred and forty-five have 
been transferred to institutions for the insane; of these one 
hundred and twenty-six were sent to Pavilion F for deten- 
tion during the legal proceedings, and one hundred and 
eighteen were committed after a period of observation. It 
thus appears that nine hundred and five patients have been 
under treatment without legal process, one hundred and 
eighteen of whom it became necessary to commit later to 
institutions for the insane. 

If this special provision for the treatment of the mentally 
deranged had not been made in the Albany Hospital, then 
these nine hundred and five patients would either have 
had to be improperly treated at home, or would have been 
committed after a probably harmful development of the 
disease. It is impossible to judge how many have been 
saved from an unnecessary commitment. 

A glance at the table shows that every form of mental 
24 



354 APPENDIX IV 

alienation or defect has been represented. With reference 
to personal mental responsibility patients may be divided 
into three groups; first, those who know what they are 
doing, and enter the hospital for treatment; second, those 
who do not know what they are doing, and are brought to 
the hospital; third, those who know what they are doing, 
and decline to enter or remain in an institution. 

In the first group are cases of neurasthenia, hysteria, 
hypochondria, melancholia, mania, light grades of dementia, 
some forms of drug addiction and alcoholism, and physical 
diseases with incidental mental symptoms. These patients 
are capable of making their wants known, of protecting 
themselves against injustice or neglect, and of enforcing any 
obligation of care or treatment assumed by the physician or 
hospital. 

The second group includes, primarily, cases of delirium 
or stupor, and secondly, cases of feeble-mindedness, either 
native, as in idiocy or imbecility, or acquired, as in advanced 
dementia, the late stages of paresis, and old age. Delirium 
and stupor are mental states due to acute and profound 
changes in physical conditions, the pathological substratum 
of which is exhaustion and toxemia. The cases are critical 
and often fatal. They can rarely be treated at home, should 
not be committed to an institution for the insane, and require 
prompt and energetic measures, such as a general hospital 
may give. The question of improper motive or unauthorized 
interference is no more pertinent than when a patient uncon- 
scious from the uremia of Bright's disease is plunged un- 
ceremoniously into a bath. The mental enfeeblement of 
advanced dementia, paresis, and old age, gives opportunity 
to designing persons, and care should be exercised by 
the custodians of these helpless patients to protect them 
from injustice. When property interests are involved it 



APPENDIX IV 355 

is wise that legal cognizance be taken of their incom- 
petency. 

In the third group are cases of early paresis and of delu- 
sional insanity. The experience of Pavilion F has shown 
that the confines of a small building are too limited for the 
characteristic restlessness and magniloquence of paresis. 
Delusional insanity is always a most troublesome condition. 
Any form of opposition, detention, or restriction is resented, 
and indeed the determination of the delusion may be diffi- 
cult, particularly when marital infideHty or domestic infelicity 
is the basis of the disturbance. Husbands with quarrelsome 
wives, wives with intemperate husbands, children with 
degenerate parents, parents with disobedient children, occa- 
sionally look to the hospital for rehef. Inasmuch as the 
management of such patients involves the question of custody 
rather than treatment, and restrictive measures are appro- 
priately decided by the courts, the hospital refrains from 
engaging in these disputes. 

It should not be forgotten that insanity is disease, and that 
the determination by a court of the treatment of disease is 
illogical. A few patients in incipient stages, less than 
twenty-five per cent, and probably not more than ten per 
cent, fail to recognize the morbid origin of their abnormal 
thought and action, and decline the remedy. They become 
a menace to themselves or others, and are subject to legal 
measures because they are unsafe, violate law and order, and 
render themselves Kable to restraint. They constitute one 
class for whom supervision is necessary. Another group of 
patients are those who do not recover and need the good 
offices of the court, not however for the safety of their neigh- 
bors, but because they are left, after the active disease has 
subsided, with a mental scar, a defect in intelhgence, and 
are incompetent to carry on independently the duties of life. 



356 APPENDIX IV 

to mingle in society, or to support or protect themselves in 
the struggle for existence. They are the demented, or ment- 
ally enfeebled, comprising the bulk of the State hospital 
population, a rapidly increasing number who are a helpless 
burden. It is right that provision for them be under the 
jurisdiction of the State, in the interest of both the State and 
its beneficiaries. 

There is thus a clearly defined line between patients need- 
ing treatment and those subject to custodial care. For the 
former the intervention of the court is unnecessary except in 
rare cases, and then when an infraction has occurred or is 
threatened; for the latter every technical requirement 
should be observed. It is not intended to urge that the laws 
should be ignored, or that an individual who resists treat- 
ment should be made forcibly to accept it, without opportu- 
nity for adjudication; but it is most imperative that patients 
who are wilhng or anxious to receive medical treatment 
should have it, and should have free access to institutions 
conducted upon such a basis that they may voluntarily and 
with confidence seek admission. The fault is not with the 
statute, but with conditions which make harmful its 
appHcation. 

In the enlistment of the general hospital in this service 
certain requirements are to be observed. The institution 
should be of high standing and command the respect of the 
community. The department for mental diseases should be 
estabhshed upon the standard of excellence prevaiHng 
throughout. It should be somewhat removed from the 
other wards that the distressing incidents of acute bodily 
sickness, particularly the critical events of surgical service, 
should not create or intensify apprehension and suspicion. 
The wards differ in design from general hospital wards, and '• 
should be more attractively equipped. Tastefully furnished 



APPENDIX IV 



357 



sitting rooms, with books, games and magazines for diver- 
sion, may be provided. The custodial feature should be 
reduced to a minimum, and intelligent visitation should be 
encouraged that the patient may always have the assur- 
ance that an appeal to his friends may be made. 

It is of first importance that the attitude of oflficers and 
nurses should be one of service upon the patient, and never 
one of dictation or assumption of superiority or command. 
When the doors swing easily both ways there need be little 
anxiety. Finally, in critical cases, there is no substitute for 
the unremitting personal attendance of skilful and sympa- 
thetic nurses. 

The function of a general hospital is the treatment of 
acute disease. The question is now presented whether 
there should be any limitation of this duty; that is, whether 
certain forms of disease should be denied admission. For 
large cities with numerous hospitals it may be expedient to 
specialize, and to designate different acute diseases to dif- 
ferent hospitals. In smaller cities, of population varying 
from fifty thousand to two hundred thousand, the two or 
three good hospitals represent the purpose of the members 
of the community to secure for themselves proper treatment 
when sick or injured. The contribution of each individual, 
whether through private or public channels, is his measure 
of protection for himself or for some one near and dear. 
If the calamity which sends him to this institution is mental 
in character, he might demand, and he would be justified 
in demanding, that he be not spumed, when his neighbor 
with a surgical lesion or an infectious disease has at his dis- 
posal every means known to science for the restoration of 
his health. 

It is not to be expected that the work of a hospital for the 
insane can be done in a general hospital. Nor can the 



358 



APPENDIX IV 



work of a general hospital be done in a hospital for the in- 
sane. But there are many forms of mental disorder having 
the character of an acute illness, and there are many forms 
of actue physical disease with disturbance of mental function, 
for which the general hospital should provide. Otherwise, 
it is not a general hospital. 



Table — Showing the Forms of Disease and the Results op 

Treatment from the Opening of Pavilion F, February 

18, 1902, TO February 28, 1907 



Fonn of Disease 


Recov- 
ered 


Im- 
proved 


Unim- 
proved 


Died 


Remain- 
ing 


Total 


"3 
,0 




M 


W 


M 


W 


M 


W 


M 


W 


M 


w 


M 


W 


H 




20 

5 

17 

3 

I 

109 
19 

S 

I 


20 

2 

17 
6 

2 

"& 
5 
3 
2 


7 
4 
18 
II 

7 

3 

I 

I 

11 

12 

15 

60 

S 


7 

6 
49 
13 

2 
10 

3 

"16 

7 
S 
3 
4 


I 

2 

20 

12 

II 

5 

16 

20 

39 

8 

2 

6 


S 
2 
44 
IS 
4 
4 
18 

40 

7 

2 
3 


7 
3 

I 

3 
12 

13 

I 


7 
2 

"s 

2 
2 


I 
I 
2 

2 
4 


I 

1 
I 

I 

3 
2 


36 

15 

57 

27 

19 

8 

17 

26 

62 

20 

139 

89 

II 

1 

3 

I 

14 

22 

2 

I 


40 

12 

114 

35 

8 

14 

22 

'67 
16 
15 
10 
12 
2 

2 

2 

12 

9 

2 

I 
I 

7 

3 

I 

I 
I 

2 

1 

5 
417 


76 
27 


Confusional insanity . . 




62 


Primary dementia 

Recurrent insanity 

Chronic delusional insanity . 

General paralysis 

Terminal dementia 

Imbecility and Idiocy 

Acute alcoholic delirium. . . 


27 
22 

39 

26 
129 

36 
154 

99 




Ptomaine poisoning 












3 


1 












I 


I 
8 
17 


I 
S 
8 

I 


"6 
2 

I 


I 
7 


3 






Tfi 




3 

I 
I 


I 
I 


34 








1 










3 










I 




















Hypochondriasis 




S 
2 
7 
2 












2 




8 

2 
14 

2 

2 


8 


Organic brain disease 










2 


2 


3 






21 
2 










2 








2 




























I 

I 
I 
1 

1 






I 
3 

I 

I 
2 

I 

7 

614 


















I 
1 


I 












2 




3 




























I 

1 
.2 


2 


Pernicious anemia 














2 

I 


Fracture of skull . . _. 














2 

I 












I 






























Totals 


i8s 


69 


197 


145 


160 


156 


S3 


33 


12 


9 









APPENDIX V 

Verbatim quotation from the 14th Annual Report (October i, 
1 90 1 — September 30, 1902) State Commission in 
Lunacy of the State of Neiv York, including a report on 
abuses in private, run-for-gain sanatoriums, written by 
M. Allen Starr, M.D. — Professor of Nervous and 
Mental Diseases at Columbia University. 

The Private Licenses Retreat System 

The number of private licensed institutions for the in- 
sane is now twenty-three. No new licenses have been 
granted during the year. It is not desirable that the num- 
ber should be increased; on the contrary, a decrease would 
be welcomed. 

The Commission feels that there should be a more ade- 
quate system of visitation of these private retreats. An 
inspection twice a year by the medical member of the Com- 
mission is not sufficient. While most of them are admirably 
conducted, there are some which do not reach the standard 
of the state hospitals in point of sanitary conditions and 
means of care and treatment of patients. In some of them 
patients are at times isolated for unconscionable periods 
and restraint with muffs and camisoles is employed to an 
unreasonable degree. In certain of them bathing facilities 
are insufficient and protection from fire inadequate. In 
some the proportion of attendants is too small, and even in 
some of the best of them the quality of the nursing leaves 
much to be desired. The following letter by Dr. M. Allen 

359 



360 APPENDIX V 

Starr to the "Medical Record" is presented as an evidence 
of the low standard of nursing existing in some of the private 
institutions: 

Nursing in Private Insane Asylums 

To the Editor of the Medical Record: 

Sir: — The first steps towards the correction of any abuse 
or evil are publicity of the facts and the awakening of public 
interest; after this the pressure of public opinion is sufl&cient 
to bring about a reform. 

I desire to call the attention of the medical public, through 
your columns, to an abuse which should surely be remedied. 
I refer to the lack of proper nursing and care of patients in 
private lunatic asylums in the vicinity. First as to the 
facts : 

Case I. — A lady of wealth and refinement, who became 
insane in Germany, was brought home by her family, at- 
tended by skilled nurses, and, for a time, was kept in her 
home. She was then sent to Asylum A, where she remained 
for three years. During this time her nurses and companions 
were women obtained from the Young Women's Christian 
Association of this city at a cost of twenty dollars per month 
— decent persons, but wholly untrained in the care of 
lunatics, and incapable of giving the mental direction and 
help which a good trained nurse can give. Subsequently, 
on her removal to her home and on being put in charge of 
two skilful nurses, a marked improvement occurred up to 
the time of her death, which took place from an intercurrent 
disease. She was charged $100 a week at the asylum, 
though the food was that of a ten-dollar boarding house. 

Case IL — A young lady, who became acutely maniacal, 
was sent to Asylum B for care. Her nurses were dismissed 



APPENDIX V 361 

and she was placed in charge of an Irish servant and a young 
French woman, who had failed as a teacher and was willing 
to take a place as nurse. Neither of them had experience, 
and the days were passed in constant struggles between them 
and the patient. For months this condition went on, though 
the family were anxious to have extra nurses and were ready 
to pay for them. They were charged seventy-five dollars 
per week. The patient had to be fed on milk and eggs only. 

Case III. — A lady suffering from chronic mania has 
been ten years in one institution, Asylum C. She is happy 
and able to be diverted. By accident I discovered that she 
was regularly locked into her room by her companion at 
8 p. M., the door into this companion's room being thus 
closed till 8 A. M., while she was often absent. Considerable 
extra expense to the family was incurred, because the attend- 
ant had a large adjacent communicating room. 

Case IV. — A lady suffering from melancholia had been 
well cared for by two trained nurses and was improving, 
when it was thought best to send her to Asylum D. On her 
admission her nurses were discharged, as the physician "pre- 
ferred his own nurses." Two weeks later I found her locked 
in a room with a good-natured, ignorant Irish girl, who in- 
formed me that she had come to the asylum within a week 
and had never done any nursing before. As proper com- 
panionship is essential to recovery in melancholia, I remon- 
strated with the physician, but no attention being paid to the 
protest, I removed her, and at home, under proper care, she 
recovered. 

Case V. — A gentleman of means and high mental ability, 
who had an attack of mild melancholia, was sent to Asylum E. 
He has had a most faithful male nurse, intelligent, sober, and 
capable of managing him perfectly. Three days after his 
admission to the asylum this man was unexpectedly dis- 



362 APPENDIX V 

charged at night, and the patient was put in the care of a 
rough, dirty Swede, who had been hired that very day, and 
had never before acted as a nurse in an asylum. To my 
protest the physician rephed that he "could trust only his 
own trained nurses — others were liable to drink and dis- 
obey orders." Two weeks later my patient was found com- 
pletely terrorized by this man and complained bitterly of his 
treatment and lack of companionship. He saw the doctor 
for fifteen minutes daily, but was with the attendant all the 
time. The man's habits were filthy, and he was better fitted 
for a stableman than for a nurse. The patient offered to 
pay for the services of his former nurse, and to pay his 
board in addition to the fifty dollars per week which he paid 
for his single room. This proposition was declined. Hence 
I removed him to another institution, where he is being 
properly nursed, and is recovering rapidly. 

Here are five cases in five different private asylums near 
New York, all of which have a good reputation. In all the 
same abuse exists — unintelligent care is the rule. In all 
these places the doctor in charge sees the patient once a day 
or every other day, as all have offices in New York. In all 
the food is plain but wholesome, and served unattractively 
and, usually, cold. In all prices from $50 to $100 a week 
are charged. Double the charge would have been cheer- 
fully paid for skilful attendants in every case mentioned. 

Secondly, as to the remedy: 

It is well known that at Bloomingdale Asylum there is a 
good training school for nurses, from which graduates come 
out every year competent to take care of cases of mental 
disease. If it became imperative upon these asylum physi- 
cians to employ trained nurses of good capacity, they could 
be found and supplied. But since there is no demand made, 
excepting by patients whose statements are not accepted, 



APPENDIX V 363 

or by relatives whose protests are disregarded, the present 
evils continue. Many physicians wash their hands of a 
patient as soon as he is consigned to an asylum, and if they 
do visit him, it is soon made clear that such visits are re- 
garded as an interference by the doctor in charge. It seems 
evident, therefore, that pubHc opinion should be aroused 
in this matter, and I hope this statement of facts of my per- 
sonal knowledge may awaken such a demand for the reform 
of these abuses that good may come of this protest against 
an existing condition. 

Yours respectfully, 

M. Allen Starr, M.D. 

