Thanks to Professor William James of Harvard 
University, I am able to cut off incredulity at its source 
by quoting his opinion. That which has already enlisted the 
support of one of the most eminent psychologists in America 
is entitled at least to a respectful hearing from laymen. 

Having at last "got round" to your MS., I have read it with very 
great interest and admiration for both its style and its temper. I 
hope you will finish it and publish it. It is the best written out 
"case" that I have seen; and you no doubt have put your finger on 
the weak spots of our treatment of the insane, and suggested the right 
line of remedy. I have long thought that if I were a milliona ire, with 
money to leave for public purposes, I should endow "Insanity" 
exclusively. 

You were doubtless a pretty intolerable character when the maniacal 
condition came on and you were bossing the imiverse. Not only 
ordinary "tact," but a genius for diplomacy, must have been needed 
for avoiding rows with you; but you certainly were wrongly treated 

nevertheless; and the spiteful Assistant M.D. at deserves to 

have his name published. Your report is full of instructiveness for 
doctors and attendants alike. 

The most striking thing in it to my mind is the sudden conversion of 
you from a delusional subject to a maniacal one — how the whole delu- 
sional system disintegrated the moment one pin was drawn out by 
your proving your brother to be genuine. I never heard of so rapid 
a change in a mental system. 



viii INTRODUCTION 

You speak of re-writing. Don't you do it. You can hardly 
improve your book. I shall keep the MS. a week longer as I wish to 
impart it to a friend. 

Smcerely yours, 

Wm. James. 

95 Irving St., Cambridge, Mass. 
November lo, 1907. 
Dear Mr. Beers: 

You are welcome to use the letter I wrote to you (on July i, 
1906) after reading the first part of your MS. in any way your judg- 
ment prompts, whether as preface, advertisement, or anything else. 
Reading the rest of it only heightens its importance in my eyes. In 
style, in temper, in good taste, it is irreproachable. As for contents, 
it is fit to remain in literature as a classic accoimt "from within" 
of an insane person's psychology. 

The book ought to go far toward helping along that terribly needed 
reform, the amelioration of the lot of the insane of our coimtry, for 
the AiKiliary Society which you propose is feasible (as numerous 
examples in other fields show), and ought to work important effects 
on the whole situation. 

You have handled a difficult theme with great skill, and produced 
a narrative of absorbing interest to scientist as well as layman. It 
reads like fiction, but it is not fiction; and this I state emphatically, 
knowing how prone the uninitiated are to doubt the truthfulness of 
descriptions of abnormal mental processes. 

With best wishes for the success of the book and the plan, both of 
which, I hope, will prove epoch-making, I remain, 

Sincerely yours, 

Wm. James. 
Clifford W. Beers, Esq., 

30 Trumbull Street, 

New Haven, Connecticut. 



CONTENTS 



PART I 

PAGE 

Chapters I-XXV i 



PART II 
Chapters XXVI-XXXI 212 

PART III 
Chapters XXXII-XXXV 256 

PART IV 
Chapters XXXVI-XXXIX 291 

Appendices 319-363 



THIS BOOK IS WRITTEN BY ONE WHOSE RARE 

EXPERIENCES IMPEL HIM TO PLEAD FOR 

THOSE AFFLICTED THOUSANDS 

LEAST ABLE TO SPEAK 

FOR THEMSELVES 



A Mind That Found Itself 



PART I 



This story is derived from as human a document as ever 
existed; and, because of its uncommon nature, perhaps no 
one thing contributes so much to its value as its authenticity. 
It is an autobiography, and more: in part it is a biography; 
for, in telling the story of my life, I must relate the history of 
another self — a self which was dominant from my twenty- 
fourth to my twenty-sixth year. During that period I was 
unlike what I had been, or what I have been since. The 
biographical part of my autobiography might be called the 
history of a mental civil war, which I fought single-handed 
on a battle-field that lay within the compass of my skull. 
An Army of Unreason, composed of the cunning and treach- 
erous thoughts of an unfair foe, attacked my bewildered 
consciousness with cruel persistency, and would have de- 
stroyed me, had not a triumphant Reason finally interposed 
a superior strategy that saved me from my unnatural self. 

I am not telling the story of my life just to write a book. 
I tell it because it seems my plain duty to do so. A marvel- 
ous escape from death and a miraculous return to health 
after an apparently fatal illness are enough to make a man 
ask himself: For what purpose was my life spared? That 
question I have asked myself, and this book is, in part, an 



a A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

answer. Until some one tells just such a story as mine and 
tells it sanely, needless abuse of helpless thousands will con- 
tinue. Great advances toward the intelligent and humane 
treatment of the insane have no doubt been made — ad- 
vances so great that the majority of insane patients in this 
country are now treated with a consideration which amounts 
to kindness. But a helpless and irresponsible minority, 
numbering thousands, are still being subjected to abuse as 
brutal as any ever visited on insane persons during those 
centuries when the strong took pleasure in torturing the 
weak. 

That insane persons are still abused is suspected by the 
public at large; but direct and convincing proof of that fact 
is seldom presented. I am sure that the proof I now 
offer will ring true, and will contribute to the correction of 
many mistaken ideas regarding the insane and their treat- 
ment, and regarding insanity itself. In the discussion of 
the crude methods of treatment which now obtain, all abuses 
which fell under my observation will of necessity be laid bare. 
A former victim of these methods, I feel at liberty to attack 
them; and the right to do so is doubly mine as I have a rem- 
edy to offer, or at least a campaign to propose. If intelli- 
gently carried on, it will, I feel confident, largely atone for 
one of the blackest pages in history. As the hostages which. 
Civilization gives to Progress^ the insane are entitled to the 
best of treatment. Certainly they are not deserving of the 
worst. 

The subject which I treat is not alone humanitarian. Its 
economic importance can hardly be overestimated. The 
ravages of insanity cost the world millions of dollars and 
thousands of lives each year. There are not fewer than two 
hundred thousand insane persons in our asylums, hospitals, 
sanatoriums, and homes. There are at least one hundred 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 3 

and fifty thousand mental incompetents in Great Britain, 
and a like number in France, and in Germany. Every civ- 
ilized country has its burdensome proportion. Nor are these 
afflicted ones the only sufferers. It is safe to assume that 
each insane person has at least five relatives and friends in- 
terested in his welfare. Granting this, there are a million 
people in this country — one eightieth of the entire population 
— directly or indirectly affected by this most dreaded dis- 
ease. And any one of the remaining seventy-nine millions 
may sooner or later be forced by Fate to join this army of 
distress. 

In spite of the gravity of these conditions comparatively 
little is being done to combat the present irresistible advance 
of insanity. No important phase of life is so generally mis- 
understood; and no equally important subject is so consist- 
ently and willingly ignored by all, except the few whose paid 
duty it is to care for the insane. The only real fight waged 
against this insidious disease is being carried on in a desul- 
tory manner by a few unselfish scientists who are devoting 
their time to investigation, in most instances without such 
support as they deserve. 

There is every reason to believe that many forms of insan- 
ity will finally be rendered amenable to treatment. With 
small-pox conquered; diphtheria doomed; yellow fever con- 
fined within limits; and tuberculosis partially controlled 
and not infrequently cured, why should insanity remain for- 
ever on the list of incurable diseases ? Though some forms 
of it may continue to baffle the alienist, recognized author- 
ities predict that most forms will in time prove curable. But 
the day of its even partial defeat cannot come until system- 
atic scientific research has first done its work — a work of 
years. Why should such research, on a scale in keeping 
with the importance of the problem, be longer delayed ? The 



4 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

fight may cost millions, but will not the eventual payment of 
an inevitable indemnity more than offset the cost? Even if 
there were no economic advantage to be gained, would not 
the dividend which will be added directly to the sum of human 
happiness be a sufficient reward? The people of this age 
can erect no more enduring monument to themselves than 
by doing that which will make it possible for posterity to 
regard the Twentieth Century as the century in which the 
cause and cure for most forms of mental diseases were dis- 
covered. 

In presenting this book I have several definite purposes. 
First : I hope to rob insanity of many of its terrors — at 
least those which do not rightly belong to it. Most children 
are afraid of the dark until they learn that its hidden mon- 
sters are imaginary. But this childish fear is a sublime men- 
tal process compared with the unreasoning dread of insanity 
that prevails in the minds of most adults throughout the 
civilized world. Under certain conditions an insane person 
is, without doubt, the unhappiest of men, but I shall prove 
that sometimes he is not less happy — is indeed happier — 
than a sane person under the most favorable conditions. To 
a startling degree the unhappiness of the insane is directly 
due to the perhaps unconscious lack of consideration with 
which they are treated. This is fortunate; for these external 
contributory causes can be eliminated; — and no one 
thing will go so far toward eliminating them as the uni- 
versal adoption and continued use of the humane and 
equally scientific principle of Non-Restraint in the treat- 
ment of insanity. As the reader will come to know: — 
doing to the insane as the sane would be done by is the 
essence of Non-Restraint. 

Secondly: Books alone can never produce the desired 
results. But a society founded and endowed for the sole 



A MmD THAT FOUND ITSELF 5 

purpose of solving this stubborn problem can at least raise 
the standard of treatment to such a level that existing short- 
comings will be forever done away with. A campaign of 
education carried out under the auspices of a National Soci- 
ety should lead to effectual reform, make even petty 
abuses appear heinous, and thus insure, upon discovery, 
the correction of all abuses. 

Thirdly: It is my hope that the beneficent rich may be 
prompted to come to the aid of the States and Nations by 
supplying funds for the erection and endowment of model 
institutions wherein mental and nervous diseases, in their 
incipient and curable stages, may be treated with the max- 
imum efficiency. With such institutions — hospitals and 
sanatoriums — in operation, thousands of those who now are 
committed indiscriminately could be restored to health and 
society, without having suffered the unfair stigma of legal 
incompetence; and patients in our State Hospitals could 
then receive that individual treatment which will insure the 
recovery of so many of them and, at the same time, enable 
those who do not recover to lead comfortable, even happy 
lives. 



II 

I WAS born shortly after sunset about thirty years ago. 
My ancestors, natives of England, settled in this country not 
long after the Mayflower first sailed into Plymouth Harbor. 
And the blood of these ancestors, by time and the happy 
union of a northern man and a southern woman — my 
parents — has perforce been blended into blood truly Amer- 
ican. 

The first years of my life were not unlike those of thousands 
of other American boys. Nothing out of the ordinary 
occurred. At the usual age, I entered a public Grammar 
School in New Haven, Connecticut, and was graduated in 
1 89 1. In the fall of that year I entered the Hillhouse High 
School of the same city. My school courses were completed 
with as little trouble as scholastic distinction. I always man- 
aged to gain promotion, however, when it was due; and, 
though few of my teachers credited me with real ability, they 
were always able to detect a certain latent capacity, which 
they evidently believed would one day develop sufficiently 
to prevent me from disgracing them. 

Upon entering the High School I had such ambitions as 
any schoolboy is apt to have. I wished to secure an election 
to a certain secret society; that gained, I wished to become 
business manager of a monthly magazine, published by that 
society. In these ambitions I succeeded. For one of my 
age I had more than an average love of business. Indeed, 
I deliberately set about learning to play the guitar well 
enough to become eligible for membership in the Banjo- 

6 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 7 

Club — and this for no more aesthetic purpose than to 
place myself in hne for the position of manager. 

In athletics there was but one game, tennis, in which I was 
actively interested. Its quick give-and-take suited my tem- 
perament, and so fond was I of it that during one summer I 
played not fewer than four thousand games. As I had an 
aptitude for tennis, and devoted more time to it than did any 
of my schoolmates, it was not surprising that I acquired skill 
enough to win the school championship during my senior 
year. But that success was not due entirely to my superior- 
ity as a player. It was due in part to what I considered un- 
fair treatment; and the fact well illustrates a certain trait of 
character which has often stood me in good stead. Among 
the spectators at the final match of the tournament were 
several girls. These schoolmates, who lived in my neigh- 
borhood, had mistaken for snobbishness a certain boyish 
diffidence for which few people gave me credit. When we 
passed each other, almost daily, this group of girls and I, 
our mutual sign of recognition was a look in an opposite 
direction. Now my opponent was well liked by these same 
girls and was entitled to their support. Accordingly they 
applauded his good plays, which was fair. They did not 
applaud my good plays, which was also fair. But what was 
not fair was that they should applaud my bad plays. Their 
doing so roiled my blood, and thanks to those who would 
have had me lose, I won. 

One more incident of my boyhood days may assist the 
reader to make my acquaintance. In my early teens I was, 
for one year, a member of a boy-choir. Barring my voice, 
I was a good chorister, and, like all good choir-boys, I was 
distinguished by that seraphic passiveness from which a 
reaction of some kind is to be expected immediately after a 
service or rehearsal. On one occasion this reaction in me 



8 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

manifested itself in a fist fight with a fellow choir-boy. 
Though I cannot recall the time when I have not relished 
verbal encounters, physical encounters had never been to 
my taste, and I did not seek this fight. My assailant really 
goaded me into it. If the honors were not mine, at least I 
must have acquitted myself creditably, for an interested 
passer-by made a remark which I have never forgotten: 
"That boy is all right after he gets started," said he. About 
twelve years later I did get started, and could that passer-by 
have seen me on any one of several occasions, he would have 
had the satisfaction of knowing that his was a prophetic eye. 

In June, 1894, 1 received a High School diploma. Shortly 
afterwards I took my examinations for Yale, and the follow- 
ing September entered the Sheffield Scientific School. 

The last week of June, 1894, was an important one in my 
life. An event then occurred which undoubtedly changed 
my career completely. It was the direct cause of my mental 
collapse six years later, and of the distressing and, in some 
instances, strange and delightful experiences on which this 
book is based. The event was the illness of an older 
brother, who, late in June, 1894, was stricken with what 
was thought to be epilepsy. Few diseases can so disorgan- 
ize a household and distress its members. My brother had 
enjoyed perfect health up to the time he was stricken; and, 
as there had never been a suggestion of epilepsy, or any 
like disease, in either branch of the family, the affliction 
came as a bolt from a clear sky. Everything possible 
was done to effect a cure, but without avail. On July 
4th, 1900, he died at the City Hospital, in Hartford, 
Connecticut, after a six years' illness, two years of which 
were spent at home, one year in a trip around the 
world in a sailing vessel, and most of the remainder on a 
farm near Hartford. The doctors decided that a tumor at 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 9 

the base of the brain had caused his malady and his death. 
That tumor was caused probably by a fall which he had 
suffered some years before, and to which no attention had 
been paid at the time. 

As I was in college when my brother was first stricken I 
had more time at my disposal than the other members of 
the family, and for that reason spent much of it with him. 
Though his attacks during the first year occurred only at 
night, it was the fear that they might occur during the day, in 
public, which affected my nerves from the beginning. 

Now, if a brother who had enjoyed perfect health all his 
life could be stricken with epilepsy, what was to prevent my 
being similarly affiicted? This was the thought that soon 
got possession of my mind. The more I considered it and 
him, the more nervous I became; and the more nervous, the 
more convinced that my own breakdown was only a ques- 
tion of time. Doomed to what I then considered a living 
death, I thought of epilepsy, I dreamed epilepsy, until thou- 
sands of times during the six years that this disquieting idea 
persisted, my overwrought imagination seemed to drag me 
to the very verge of an attack. Yet at no time during my 
life have these early fears been realized. 

For the fourteen months succeeding the time my brother 
was first stricken, I was greatly harassed with fear; but not 
until later did my nerves really conquer me. I remember 
distinctly when the break came. It happened in Novem- 
ber, 1895, during a recitation in German. That hour in the 
class-room was one of the most disagreeable I ever experi- 
enced. It seemed as if my nerves had snapped, like so many 
minute bands of rubber stretched beyond their elastic limit. 
At this time, and on many subsequent like occasions, the 
one thought uppermost in my mind, though I gave no out- 
ward evidence of my great despair, was that my psychic 



lO A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

convulsion would become physical. My imagination seemed 
to tear my body into shreds. Had I had the courage to 
leave the room, I should have done so; but I sat as if para- 
lyzed until the class was dismissed. 

That term I did not again attend recitations. Continuing 
my studies at home I passed satisfactory examinations which 
enabled me to resume my place in the class-room the follow- 
ing January. During the remainder of my college years I 
seldom entered a recitation-room with any other feeling than 
that of dread, though the absolute assurance that I should 
not be called upon to recite did mitigate the misery. The 
professors, who had been told about my state of health and 
the cause of it, invariably treated me with consideration; 
but, though I believe they never doubted the genuineness 
of my excuse, it was no easy matter to keep them convinced 
for almost two of the three years of my course. My inability 
to recite was not due usually to any lack of preparation. 
However well prepared I might be, the moment a professor 
called upon me to recite, a mingling of a thousand disconcert- 
ing sensations, and the distinct thought that at last the dread 
attack was at hand, would suddenly intervene and deprive 
me of all but the power to say, "Not prepared." Weeks 
would pass without any other record being placed opposite 
my name than a zero, or a blank indicating that I had not 
been called upon at all. Occasionally, however, a profes- 
sor, in justice to himself and to the other students, would 
compel me to recite, and at such times I managed to make 
enough of a recitation to hold my place in the class. 

When I entered Yale I had four definite ambitions: first, 
to secure an election to a certain secret society; second, to 
become one of the editors of the Yale Record, an illus- 
trated humorous bi-weekly; third (granting that I should 
have succeeded in this latter ambition), to convince my col- 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF II 

leagues that I should have the position of business-mana- 
ger — an office which I sought, not for the honor, but be- 
cause I believed it would enable me to earn an amount of 
money at least equal to the cost of tuition for my three years 
at Yale; fourth (and this was my chief ambition), to win 
my diploma within the prescribed time. These four ambi- 
tions I fortunately achieved. 

A man's college days, collectively, are usually his happi- 
est. Most of mine were not happy. Yet I look back upon 
them with great satisfaction, for I feel that I was fortunate 
enough to absorb some of that intangible but very real ele- 
ment known as the "Yale spirit." This has helped to keep 
Hope alive within me during my most discouraged moments, 
and now makes the accomplishment of my purpose seem 
easy and sure. 



Ill 

On the thirtieth day of June, 1897, I was graduated at 
Yale. Had I then reahzed that I was a sick man I could and 
would have taken a rest; but, in a way, I had become ac- 
customed to the ups and downs of a nervous existence, and, 
as I could not really afford a rest, six days after my gradua- 
tion I entered upon the duties of a clerk in the office of the 
Collector of Taxes in the city of New Haven. I was fortunate 
in securing such a position at that time, for the hours were 
comparatively short and the work as congenial as any could 
have been under the circumstances. I entered the Tax Office 
with the intention of staying only until such time as I should 
secure a position in New York. About a. year later I secured 
the desired position. After remaining in it for eight months 
(with the firm whose employ I re-entered in 1904), I left it, 
in order to take a position which seemed to offer a field of 
endeavor more to my taste. From May, 1899, till the middle 
of June, 1900, I was a clerk in one of the smaller life insur- 
ance companies, whose home office was within a stone's 
throw of what some men consider the center of the universe. 
To be in the very heart of the financial district of New 
York appealed strongly to my imagination. As a result of 
certain mistaken ideals, the making of money was then a 
passion with me. I foolishly wished to taste the bitter-sweet 
of power based on wealth. 

For the first eighteen months of my life in New York, my 
health seemed no worse than it had been during the preceding 
three years. The old dread still possessed me. I continued 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 13 

to have my more and less nervous days, weeks, and months. 
In March, 1900, however, there came a change for the worse. 
At that time I had a severe attack of grip which incapaci- 
tated me for two weeks. As was to be expected in my case, 
this illness seriously depleted my vitality, and left me 
in a frightfully depressed condition — a depression which 
continued to grow upon me until the final crash came, on 
June 23d, 1900. The events of that day, seemingly disas- 
trous as then viewed, but all for the best as the issue proved, 
forced me along paths traveled by thousands, but compre- 
hended by few. 

I had continued to perform my clerical duties until June 
15th. On that day I was compelled to stop, and that at 
once. I had reached a point where my will had to capitu- 
late to Unreason — that unscrupulous usurper. My pre- 
vious five years as a neurasthenic had led me to believe that 
I had experienced all the disagreeable sensations an over- 
worked and unstrung nervous system could suffer. But on 
this day several new and terrifying sensations seized me and 
rendered me all but helpless. My condition, however, was 
not apparent even to those who worked with me at the same 
desk. I remember trying to speak and at times finding my- 
self unable to give utterance to my thoughts. Though I was 
able to answer questions, that fact hardly diminished my 
feeling of apprehension, for a single failure in an attempt to 
speak will stagger any man, no matter what his state of 
health. I tried to copy certain records in the day's work, 
but my hand was too unsteady, and I found it difficult to 
read the words and figures presented to my tired vision in 
blurred confusion. 

That afternoon, conscious that some terrible calamity was 
impending, but not knowing what would be its nature, I 
performed a very curious act. Certain early literary efforts 



14 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

which had failed of publication in the college paper, but 
which I had jealously cherished for several years, I utterly 
destroyed. Then, after a hurried arrangement of my affairs, 
I took an early afternoon train, and soon found myself at 
home. Home life did not make me better, and, except for 
three or four short walks, I did not go out of the house at all 
until June 23d, when I went in a most unusual way. To 
relatives I said little about my state of health, beyond the 
general statement that I had never felt worse — a statement 
which, when made by a neurasthenic, means much but proves 
little. For five years I had had my ups and downs, and 
both my relatives and myself had begun to look upon these 
as things which would probably be corrected in and by time. 
Had the seriousness of my condition been realized, earlier 
arrangements would have been made which would have 
enabled me to take the long rest I needed. I am now glad 
that no such rest was taken. Had I been restored to health 
sooner than I was, or under different conditions, I should 
not have suffered and learned; nor should I have tasted the 
peculiar joy of a life little known and less understood by 
mankind at large. 

The day after my home-coming I made up my mind, or 
that part of it which was still within my control, that the 
time had come to quit business entirely and take a rest of 
months. I even arranged with a younger brother to set out 
at once for some quiet place in the White Mountains, where 
I hoped to s,teady my shattered nerves. At this time (to 
say nothing of the constantly recurring thought that I was 
about to fall into an epileptic attack) I felt as though in a 
tremor from head to foot. 

This dread to which I so frequently refer was a thing which 
I seldom, if ever, referred to while it persisted. On more 
than one occasion I did say to my friends that I would rather 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 15 

die than live an epileptic; yet, if I rightly remember, I never 
declared the actual fear that I was doomed to bear such an 
affliction. However, I believe that I said on a few occasions, 
though without meaning it at the time, that, if necessary, I 
should kill myself rather than endure what I then thought, 
but do not now think, the most miserable of lives. Though 
I held the mad belief that I should suffer epilepsy, I held the 
sane hope, amounting to belief, that I should escape it. 
This fact may account, in a measure, for my six years of 
endurance. 

On the 1 8th of June I felt so much worse that I went 
to my bed and stayed there until the 23d. During the night 
of the 1 8th my persistent dread became a false belief 
— a delusion. What I had long expected I now became 
convinced had at last occurred. I believed myself to be a 
confirmed epileptic, and that conviction was stronger than 
any ever held by a sound intellect. The half-resolve, made 
before my mind was actually impaired, namely, that I would 
kill myself rather than live the life I dreaded, now divided 
my attention with the belief that the stroke had fallen. From 
that time my one thought was to hasten the end, for I felt 
that I should lose the chance to die should relatives find 
me in a seizure of the supposed malady. 

Considering the state of my mind and my inability at that 
time to appreciate the enormity of such an end as I half con- 
templated, my suicidal purpose was not entirely selfish. That 
I had never seriously contemplated suicide is proved by the 
fact that I had not provided myself with the means of accom- 
plishing it, despite my habit, which has long been remarked 
by those intimately acquainted with me, of preparing for 
unlikely contingencies. So far as I had the control of my 
faculties, it must be admitted that I deliberated; but, strictly 
speaking, the rash act which followed cannot correctly be 



l6 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

called an attempt at suicide — for, how can a man who is 
not himself kill himself? 

Soon my disordered brain was busy with schemes for 
death. I distinctly remember one which included a row on 
Lake Whitney, near New Haven. This row I intended to 
take in the most treacherous boat obtainable. Such a craft 
could be easily upset, and I should so bequeath to relatives 
and friends a sufficient number of reasonable doubts to rob 
my death of the usual stigma. I also remember searching 
for some deadly drug which I hoped to find about the house. 
But the quantity and quality of what I found was not such 
as I dared to trust. I then thought of severing my jugular 
vein, even going so far as to test against my throat the edge 
of a razor which, after the deadly impulse first asserted itself, 
I had secreted in a convenient place. I really wished to die, 
but so uncertain and bloody a method did not appeal to me. 
Nevertheless, had I felt sure that in my tremulous frenzy I 
could accomplish the act with skilful dispatch, I should 
at once have ended my troubles. 

My imaginary attacks were now recurring with distracting 
frequency, and I was in constant fear of discovery. During 
these three or four days I slept scarcely at all — even the 
medicine given to induce sleep having little effect. Though 
inwardly frenzied, I gave no outward sign of my condition. 
Most of the time I remained quietly in bed. I spoke but 
seldom. I had practically, though not entirely, lost the power 
of speech; and my almost unbroken silence aroused no sus- 
picions as to the seriousness of my plight. 

By a process of elimination, all suicidal methods but one 
had at last been put aside. On that one my mind now cen- 
tered. My room was on the fourth floor of a house — one 
of a block of five — in which my parents lived. The house 
stood several feet back from the street. The sills of my win- 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 



17 



dows were a little more than thirty feet above the ground. 
Under one was a flag pavement, extending from the house 
to the front gate. Under the other was a rectangular coal- 
hole covered with an iron grating. This was surrounded by 
flagging over a foot in width; and, connecting it and the 
pavement proper, was another flag. So that all along 
the front of the house, stone or iron filled a space at no point 
less than two feet in width. It required no great amount of 
calculation to determine how slight the chance of surviving 
a fall from either of these windows. 

About dawn I arose. Stealthily I approached the window, 
pushed open the blinds and looked out — and down. Then I 
closed the blinds as noiselessly as possible and crept back to 
bed: I had not yet become so desperate that I dared to take 
the leap. Scarcely had I pulled up the covering when a 
watchful relative entered my room, drawn thither perhaps 
by that protecting prescience which love inspires. I thought 
her words revealed a suspicion that she had heard me at the 
window, and speechless as I was I had enough speech to 
deceive her. For, of what account are Truth and Love when 
Life itself has ceased to seem desirable ? 

The dawn soon hid itself in the brilliancy of a perfect June 
day. Never had I seen a brighter — to look at; never a 
darker — to live through, — or a better to die upon. Its 
very perfection and the songs of the robins, which at that 
season were plentiful in the neighborhood, served but to 
increase my despair and make me the more willing to die. 
As the day wore on my anguish became more intense, but 
I managed to mislead those about me by uttering a word 
now and then, and feigning to read a newspaper, which to 
me, however, appeared an uninteUigible confusion of type. 
My brain was in a ferment. It felt as if pricked by a million 
needles at white heat. My whole body felt as though it 



l8 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

would be torn apart by the terrific nervous strain under 
which I labored. 

Shortly after noon, dinner having been served, my mother 
entered the room and asked me if she should bring me some 
dessert. I assented. It was not that I cared for the dessert; 
I had no appetite. I wished to get her out of the room, for 
I believed myself to be on the verge of another attack. She 
left at once. I knew that in two or three minutes she would 
return. The crisis seemed at hand. It was now or never 
for liberation. She had probably descended one of three 
flights of stairs when, with the mad desire to dash my brains 
out on the pavement below, I rushed to that window which 
was directly over the flag walk. Providence must have 
guided my movements, for in some otherwise unaccountable 
way, on the very point of hurling myself out bodily, I chose 
to drop feet foremost instead. With my fingers I clung for a 
moment to the sill. Then I let go. In falling my body 
turned so as to bring my right side toward the building. I 
struck the ground a little more than two feet from the foun- 
dation of the house, and at least three to the left of the point 
from which I started. Missing the stone pavement by not 
more than three or four inches, I struck on compara- 
tively soft earth. My position must have been almost 
upright, for both heels struck the ground squarely. The 
concussion slightly crushed one heel bone and broke most 
of the small bones in the arch of each foot, but there 
was no mutilation of the flesh. As my feet struck the ground 
my right hand struck hard against the front of the house, 
and it is probable that these three points of contact divided 
the force of the shock and prevented my back from being 
broken. As it was, it narrowly escaped a fracture and, for 
several weeks afterward, it felt as if powdered glass had 
been substituted for cartilage between the vertebrae. 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 19 

I did not lose consciousness even for a second, and the 
demoniacal dread, which had possessed me from June, 
1894, until this fall to earth just six years later, was dispelled 
the instant I struck the ground. At no time since that in- 
stant have I experienced one of my imaginary attacks; nor 
has my mind even for a moment entertained such an idea. 
The little demon which had tortured me relentlessly for six 
years evidently lacked the stamina which I must have had to 
survive the shock of my suddenly arrested flight through 
space. That the very delusion which drove me to a death- 
loving desperation should so suddenly vanish, seems to me 
to indicate that many a suicide might be averted if the per- 
son contemplating it could find the proper assistance when 
such a crisis impends. 



IV 

Though I was unquestionably insane before the physical 
injuries which I sustained, I am inclined to believe that 
without the injuries my insanity would have manifested itself 
in a mild and easily curable form. As it was, the mere 
shock to my spine affected my brain and complicated my 
case. Within a few hours after my fall my brain was in a 
seriously disordered condition. 

I have my own perhaps fanciful theory regarding the effect 
of that concussion. In physics, the fact that a change of 
molecular structure in a magnetized bar of soft iron will 
change the character of its magnetism is proved by a very 
simple and interesting experiment. If a magnet in the shape 
of a straight bar be held vertically, the top of the magnet being 
positive and the bottom negative, the positive end may be 
immediately changed to negative, and the negative to 
positive, if either be struck a sharp blow with a hammer. 
The character of the magnetism may be changed as fre- 
quently as the experimenter wishes by thus striking the two 
ends alternately. Now if the naturally positive end be left 
negatively magnetized, and the magnet then be laid aside, 
it will gradually lose its negative quality and eventually be- 
come positive as at first. This return of the iron to its 
normal character is due to an irresistible tendency of the 
molecules to re-adjust themselves and take their original 
relative positions. 

The human body, like every physical object, including the 
earth, is, potentially at least, a magnet. My body as it hung 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 21 

from the window-sill was feebly positive, as it were, at the 
top. If the molecular structure of a bar of iron can be 
changed by a slight blow, it seems reasonable to suppose 
that the molecular structure of the human body, and espe- 
cially of the nervous system, may be completely altered by 
such a blow as my body received when my feet struck the 
ground. As in the case of a magnet left in a state of mag- 
netism other than its normal, the molecular structure of my 
body was left to re-adjust itself by the slow process of time. 
And, after a period of over three years, it finally did become 
sufficiently positive at the top to enter again the magnetic 
field of sane, human endeavor. 



It was squarely in front of the dining-room window that 
I feU, and those at dinner were more startled than I. It 
took them a second or two to realize what had happened. 
Then my younger brother rushed out, and with other assist- 
ance carried me into the house. Naturally that dinner was 
permanently interrupted. A mattress was placed on the 
floor of the dining-room and I on that, suffering intensely. 
I said little, but what I said was significant. "I thought 
I had epilepsy!" was my first remark; and several 
times I said, "I wish it was over!" For I believed that my 
death was only a question of hours. To the doctors, who 
soon arrived, I said, "My back is broken!" — raising my- 
self slightly, however, as I said so. 

An ambulance soon arrived, in which I was placed. Be- 
cause of the nature of my injuries it was necessary that the 
ambulance proceed slowly. The trip of a mile and a half 
seemed interminable, but in due time I arrived at Grace 
Hospital and was placed in a room which soon became a 
chamber of torture. It was on the second floor; and the 



22 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

first object to engage my attention and stir my imagination 
was a man who appeared outside my window and placed in 
position several heavy iron bars. These were, of course, 
for my protection, but at that time no such idea occurred to 
me. My mind was in a delusional state, ready and eager 
to adopt any external stimulus as a pretext for its wild in- 
ventions, and that barred window started a terrible train of 
delusions which persisted for seven hundred and ninety- eight 
days. During that period my mind imprisoned both mind 
and body in a dungeon than which none was ever more secure. 
Klnowing that those who attempt suicide are usually placed 
under arrest, I believed myself under legal restraint. I im- 
agined that at any moment I might be taken to court to face 
some charge lodged against me by the local police. Every 
act of those about me seemed to be a part of what, in police 
parlance, is commonly called, the "Third Degree." The 
hot poultices placed upon my feet and ankles threw me into 
a profuse perspiration, and my very active association of 
mad ideas convinced me that I was being "sweated" — 
another police term which I had often seen in the newspapers, 
I inferred that this third-degree sweating process was being 
inflicted in order to extort some kind of a confession, though 
what my captors wished me to confess I could not for my life 
imagine. As I was really in a state of delirium, with high 
fever, I had an insatiable thirst. The only liquids given me 
were hot saline solutions. Though there was good reason 
for administering these, I believed they were designed for no 
other purpose than to increase my sufferings, as a part of the 
same inquisitorial process. But had a confession been due 
I could hardly have made it, for that part of my brain which 
controls the power of speech was seriously affected, and was 
soon to be further disabled by my ungovernable thoughts. 
Only an occasional word did I utter. 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 



23 



Certain hallucinations of hearing, or "false voices," added 
to my torture. Within my range of hearing, but beyond 
the reach of my understanding, there was a hellish vocal hum. 
Now and then I would recognize the subdued voice of a 
former friend ; now and then I would hear the voices of some 
who I believed were not friends. All these referred to me 
and uttered what I could not clearly distinguish, but knew 
must be imprecations. Ghostly rappings on the walls and 
ceiling of my room punctuated unintelligible mumblings of 
invisible persecutors. Those were long nights. 

I remember distinctly my delusion of the following day — 
Sunday. I seemed to be no longer in the hospital. In some 
mysterious way I had been spirited aboard a huge ocean 
steamship. I first discovered this when the ship was in mid- 
ocean. The day was clear, the sea apparently calm, but 
for all that, the ship was slowly sinking. And it was I, of 
course, who had brought on what must turn out fatally for 
all, unless the coast of Europe could be reached before the 
water in the hold should extinguish the fires. How had this 
peril overtaken us? Simply enough: During the night I 
had in some way — a way still unknown to me — opened a 
port-hole below the water-line; and those in charge of the 
vessel seemed powerless to close it. Every now and 
then I could hear parts of the vessel give way under the 
strain. I could hear the air hiss and whistle spitefully under 
the resistless impact of the invading waters; I could hear the 
crashing of timbers as partitions were wrecked; and as 
the water rushed in at one place I could see, at another, 
scores of helpless passengers swept overboard into the sea — 
my unintended victims. I believed that I too might at any 
moment be swept away. That I was not thrown into the 
sea by vengeful fellow-passengers was, I thought, due to 
their desire to keep me alive until, if possible, land should 



24 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

be reached, when a more painful death could be inflicted 
upon me. 

While aboard my phantom-ship I managed in some way 
to establish an electric railway system; and the trolley cars 
which passed the hospital were soon running along 
the deck of my ocean-liner, carrying passengers from the 
places of peril in the ship's hold to what seemed places of 
comparative safety at the bow. Every time I heard a car 
pass the hospital one of mine went clanging along the ship's 
deck. 

This feverish day-dream is less remarkable than the ex- 
ternal stimuli which excited it. As I have since ascertained 
there was, just outside my room, an elevator and near it a 
speaking tube. Whenever the speaking-tube was used from 
another part of the building, the summoning whistle con- 
veyed to my mind the idea of the exhaustion of air in a ship- 
compartment, and the opening and shutting of the elevator 
door completed the illusion of a ship fast going to pieces. 
But the ship my mind was on never reached any shore, nor 
did she sink. Like a mirage she vanished, and again I found 
myself safe in my bed at the hospital. "Safe," did I say? 
Scarcely that, — for deliverance from one impending disaster 
simply meant immediate precipitation into another. 

My delirium gradually subsided, and four or five days 
after the 23d the doctors were able to set my broken bones. 
To my gradually increasing insanity the operation suggested 
new delusions. Shortly before the adjustment of the plaster 
casts, my legs, for obvious reasons, were shaved from shin 
to calf. This unusual tonsorial operation I read for a sign 
of degradation — associating it with what I had heard of the 
treatment of murderers and with similar customs in more 
barbarous lands. It was about this time also that strips of 
court-plaster, in the form of a cross, were placed on my brow, 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 25 

which had been slightly scratched in my fall, and this I read 
for a brand of infamy. 

Had my health been good I should at this time have 
been participating in the Triennial of my class at Yale. In- 
deed, I was a member of the Triennial Committee and 
though, when I left New York on June 15th, I had been 
feeling terribly ill, I had then hoped to brace myself for the 
anticipated pleasures of the reunion. The class reunions 
were held on Tuesday, June 26th — three days after my 
collapse. Those familiar with Yale customs know that 
the Harvard baseball game is one of the chief events of 
the commencement season. Headed by brass bands, all the 
classes whose reunions fall in the same year, march to the 
Yale Athletic Field to see the game and renew their youth 
— using up as much vigor in one delirious day as would in- 
sure a ripe old age if less prodigally expended. These 
classes with their bands and cheering, accompanied by thou- 
sands of other vociferating enthusiasts, march through West 
Chapel Street — the most direct route from the Campus to 
the Field. It is upon this line of march that Grace Hospital 
is situated, and I knew that on the day of the game the Yale 
thousands would pass the scene of my incarceration. 

I have endured so many days of the most exquisite tor- 
ture that I hesitate to distinguish among them by degrees; 
each deserves its own unique place, even as a Saint's Day 
on the calendar of an olden Spanish inquisitor. But, if the 
palm is to be awarded to any, June 26th, 1900, perhaps has 
the first claim. 

My state of mind at this time might be pictured thus: 
The criminal charge of attempted suicide stood against me 
on June 23d. By the 26th many other and worse charges 
had accumulated. The public believed me the most des- 
picable member of my race. The papers were filled with 



26 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

accounts of my misdeeds. The thousands of collegians gath- 
ered in the city, many of whom I knew personally, loathed 
the very thought that a Yale man should so disgrace his 
Alma Mater. And when they approached the hospital on 
their way to the Athletic Field, I concluded that it was their 
intention to take me from my bed, drag me to the lawn, and 
there tear me limb from limb. Few incidents during my 
unhappiest years are more vividly or circumstantially 
impressed upon my memory. The fear, to be sure, was 
absurd, but in the lurid lexicon of Unreason there is no such 
word as "absurd." The college cries which filled the air 
that afternoon struck more terror to my heart than all 
the Yale cheers of history have struck to the hearts of van- 
quished rivals on field or water. 



V 

Naturally I was suspicious of all about me, and became 
more so each day. But not until about a month after my 
hurt did I refuse to recognize my relatives. While I was at 
Grace Hospital my father and eldest brother called almost 
every day to see me, and, though I said little, I still accepted 
them in their proper characters. I remember well a conver- 
sation one morning with my father. The words I uttered 
were few but full of meaning. Shortly before this time my 
death had been momentarily expected. I still believed that 
I was surely about to die as a result of my injuries, and I 
wished in some way to let my father know that, despite my 
apparently ignominious end, I appreciated all that he had 
done for me during my life. Few men, I believe, ever had 
a more painful time in expressing their feelings than I had on 
that occasion. I had but little control over my mind, and 
my power of speech was impaired. My father sat beside 
my bed. Looking up at him, I said, "You have been a 
good father to me." 

"I have always tried to be," was his characteristic reply. 

After the broken bones had been set, and the first effects 
of the severe shock I had sustained had worn off, I began to 
gain strength. About the third week I was able to sit up 
and was occasionally taken out of doors. But each day, and 
especially during the hours of the night, my delusions in- 
creased in force and variety. The world was fast becoming 
to me a stage on which every human being within the range 
of my senses seemed to be playing a part, and that a part 

27 



28 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

which would lead not only to my destruction (for which I 
cared little), but also to the ruin of all with whom I had ever 
come in contact. In the month of July several thunder- 
storms occurred. To me the thunder was "stage" thunder, 
the lightning, man-made, and the accompanying rain due 
to some clever contrivance of my persecutors. There was 
a chapel connected with the hospital — or at least a room 
where religious services were held every Sunday. To me 
the hymns were funeral dirges; and the mumbled prayers, 
faintly audible, were in behalf of every sufferer in the world 
but one. 



It was my eldest brother who looked after my care and 
interests during my entire illness. Toward the end of July, 
he informed me that I was to be taken home again. 
I must have given him an incredulous look, for he 
said, "Don't you think we can take you home? Well, 
we can and will." Believing myself in the hands of the 
police I did not see how that was possible. Nor did I have 
any desire to return. That a man who had disgraced his 
family should again enter his old home, and expect his rel- 
atives to treat him as though nothing were changed, was a 
thought against which my whole nature rebelled; and, when 
the day came for my return, I fought my brother and the 
doctor feebly as they lifted me from the bed. But, realizing 
the uselessness of resistance, I soon submitted, was placed 
in a carriage, and driven to the house I had left a month 
earlier. 

For a few hours my mind was easier than it had been. 
But my new-found ease was soon dispelled by the appear- 
ance of a nurse — one of several who had attended me at the 
hospital. Though at home and surrounded by relatives I 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 29 

jumped at the conclusion that I was still under police sur- 
veillance. At my request my brother had promised not to 
engage any nurse who had been in attendance at the hos- 
pital. The difficulty of procuring any other led him to dis- 
regard my request, which at the time he held simply as a 
whim. But he did not disregard it entirely, for the nurse 
selected had merely acted as a substitute on one occasion, and 
then only for about an hour. That was long enough, though, 
for my memory to become acquainted with her image. My 
brother's mistake was grave, for the unintentional breaking 
of that promise broke the only remaining thread that bound 
me to the world. And it is now clear to my judgment that 
the most trifling promise, direct or implied, made under such 
circumstances, should, if possible, be carried out to the letter. 
This question I have since discussed with alienists, all of 
whom agree with me. Suspicion cannot be overcome by 
being fed upon untruth itself, and suspicion is the condi- 
tion of most unbalanced minds. I am convinced that the 
unhappiness of many such would be greatly decreased if, 
as nearly as possible, they received at the hands of sane 
persons the treatment accorded sane persons. It should 
never be taken for granted that a perverted mind cannot 
detect a perverted moral act. To gain the shattered confi- 
dence of suspicious insane patients, their treatment should 
be consistently honest and kind. But let me in all justice 
and all gratitude emphasize the fact that my brother was 
not to blame for his error of judgment; and without abating 
a jot of my conviction that such little subterfuges are injuri- 
ous to the patient and should be scrupulously avoided — 
most of all by his relatives, and by the doctors and nurses 
in charge of him — I must add that, of course, had it not 
been this incident, almost any other would as surely have 
precipitated the plunge to chaos of my swaying reason. 



30 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

Finding myself still under surveillance, I soon jumped to 
a second conclusion, namely: that this was no brother of 
mine at all. He instantly appeared in the light of a sinister 
double, acting as a detective. After that I refused abso- 
lutely to speak to him again, and this repudiation I extended 
to all other relatives, friends, and acquaintances. If the man 
I had accepted as my brother was spurious, so were aU the 
rest — such was my deduction. For more than two years I 
was without relatives or friends, in fact, a man without a 
world, except that one created by my own mind from the 
chaos that reigned within it. Having lost aU touch, even with 
my mother and father whom I had seen, naturally God, 
whom I had not seen, ceased to exist for me. Thus I was 
denied the comfort which comes to so many in distress. 

While I was at Grace Hospital it was my sense of hearing 
which was the most disturbed. Soon after I was placed in 
my room at home all of my senses became perverted. I 
still heard the "false voices" — which were doubly false, 
for Truth no longer existed. The tricks played upon me by 
my perverted senses of taste, touch, smell, and sight were 
the source of great mental anguish. None of my food had 
its usual flavor. This soon led to that common delusion that 
some of it contained poison — not deadly poison, for I knew 
that my enemies hated me too much to allow me the boon 
of death, but poison sufficient to aggravate my discomfort. 
At breakfast I had cantaloupe, liberally sprinkled with salt. 
The salt seemed to pucker my mouth, and I believed it to be 
powdered alum. Usually, with my supper, sliced peaches 
were served. Though there was sugar on the peaches, salt 
would have done as well. Salt, sugar, and powdered alum 
had become the same to me. 

Familiar materials had acquired a different "feel." In the 
dark, the bed sheets at times seemed like silk. As I had not 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 31 

been born with a golden spoon in my mouth, or other acces- 
sories of a useless luxury, I believed the detectives had pro- 
vided these silken sheets for some hostile purpose of their 
own. What that purpose was I could not divine, and my 
very inability to arrive at a satisfactory conclusion stimu- 
lated my brain to the assembling of disturbing thoughts in 
an almost endless train. Thus does a perverted sense 
grow by what it feeds on. 

Imaginary breezes struck my face, gentle, but not welcome, 
most of them from parts of the room where currents of air 
could not possibly originate. They seemed to come from 
cracks in the walls and ceiling and annoyed me exceedingly. 
I thought them in some way related to that Chinese method 
of torture by which water is allowed to strike the victim's 
forehead, a drop at a time, until death releases him. 

The old doctrine of brimstone, Hell-fire, and damnation 
is not so difficult for me to believe as it is for that type of 
saint who would get to Glory easily, or, at least, substitute 
for Heaven a sweet and unmerited oblivion. For does not 
the Devil lurk in one's nasal passages? Stifling fumes of 
sulphur are as the crisp air of wooded glens compared to 
the odor of burning human flesh and other pestilential 
fumes which seemed to assail me. 

My sense of sight was subjected to many weird and un- 
canny effects. Phantasmagoric visions made their visitations 
throughout the night, for a time with such regularity that I 
used to await their coming with a certain restrained curiosity. 
Although I was not entirely unaware that something was 
ailing with my mind, I did not accept these visions, or any 
other abnormal effects of sense, as symptoms of insanity. 
All these horrors I took for the work of detectives, who sat 
up nights racking their brains in order to rack and utterly 
wreck my own with a cruel and unfair "Third Degree." 



32 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

Handwriting on the wall has ever struck terror to the 
hearts of sane men. I remember as one of my most unpleas- 
ant experiences that I began to see handwriting on the sheets 
of my bed staring me in the face, and not me alone, but 
also the spurious relatives who often stood or sat near me. 
On each fresh sheet placed over me I would soon begin to 
see words, sentences, and signatures, all in my own hand- 
writing. Yet I could not decipher any of the words, and 
this fact dismayed me, for I firmly believed that those who 
stood about could read them all and found them to be 
incriminating evidence. 

I imagined that these vision-like effects, with few excep- 
tions, were produced by a magic-lantern, controlled by 
some of my myriad persecutors. The lantern was rather a 
cinematographic contrivance. Moving pictures, often bril- 
liantly colored, were thrown on the ceiling of my room and 
sometimes on the sheets of my bed. Human bodies, dis- 
membered and gory, were one of the most common of these. 
All this may have been due to the fact that, as a boy, I had 
fed my imagination on the sensational news of the day as 
presented in the public press. These papers I had been 
accustomed to read thoroughly, reading first the worst news 
and ending with the best — if I had time. Despite the heavy 
penalty which I now paid for thus loading my mind, I be- 
lieve this unwise indulgence gave a breadth and variety to 
my peculiar psychological experience which it otherwise 
would have lacked. For with an insane ingenuity I managed 
to connect myself with almost every crime of importance of 
which I had ever read. 

Dismembered human bodies were not alone my bed-fel- 
lows at this time. I remember one vision of vivid beauty. 
Swarms of butterflies and large and gorgeous moths appeared 
on the sheets. That sight I really enjoyed, knowing that 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 33 

the pretty creatures were not alive; and I wished that the 
usually unkind operator would continue to minister to my 
aesthetic taste by feeding it on colors so rich and so faultlessly 
combined. Another pleasing vision appeared about twi- 
light several days in succession. I can trace it directly 
to impressions gained in early childhood. The quaint 
pictures by Kate Greenaway — little children in attrac- 
tive dress, playing in old-fashioned gardens — would float 
through space just outside my windows. The pictures were 
always accompanied by the gleeful shouts of real children 
in the neighborhood, who, before being sent to bed by 
watchful parents, devoted the last hour of the day to play. 
It was their shouts that stirred my memories of childhood 
and brought forth these pictures. 

In my chamber of intermittent horrors and momentary 
delights, uncanny occurrences were frequent. I believed 
there was some one who at faU of night secreted himself 
under my bed. That in itself was not peculiar, as sane per- 
sons, at one time or another, are troubled by that same 
notion. But my bed-fellow — under the bed — was a 
detective; and he spent most of his time during the night 
pressing pieces of ice against my injured heels, to pre- 
cipitate, as I thought, my overdue confession. 

The piece of ice in the pitcher of water which stood usu- 
ally on the table clinked against the pitcher's side as its 
center of gravity shifted through melting. It was many 
days before I reasoned out the cause of this sound; and until 
I did I supposed it to be produced by some mechanical 
device resorted to by the detectives for a purpose. Thus it 
is that the most trifling occurrence assumes vast significance 
to an unsound mind afflicted with certain types of delusion. 



VI 

After remaining at home for about a month, during which 
time I showed no improvement mentally, though I did gain 
physically, I was taken to a private sanatorium. My des- 
tination was frankly disclosed to me. But my habit of dis- 
belief had now become confirmed, and I thought myself on 
the way to a trial in New York City, for some one of the 
many crimes with which I stood charged. 

My emotions on leaving New Haven were, I imagine, 
much the same as those of a condemned and penitent crim- 
inal who looks upon the world for the last time. The day 
was hot, and, as we drove to the railway station, the blinds 
on most of the houses in the streets through which we passed 
were seen to be closed. The reason for this was not then 
apparent to me. I thought I saw an unbroken line of de- 
serted houses, and I imagined that their desertion had been 
deliberately planned as a sign of displeasure on the part of 
their former occupants. As citizens of New Haven I sup- 
posed them bitterly ashamed of such a despicable inhabitant 
as myself. Because of the early hour, the streets were 
practically deserted. This fact too I interpreted to my own 
disadvantage ; and, as the carriage crossed the main business 
thoroughfare, I took what I believed to be my last look at 
that portion of my native city. 

From the carriage I was carried to the train and placed 
in the smoking-car in the last seat on the right-hand side. 
The back of the seat next in front was reversed so that my 
legs might be placed in a comfortable position, and one of 

34 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 35 

the boards used by card-playing travelers was placed beneath 
them as a support. With a consistent degree of suspicion 
I paid particular attention to a blue mark on the face of the 
railroad ticket held by my custodian. I took it to be a means 
of identification for use in court, but wherefore, I knew not. 
That one's memory may perform its function in the grip 
of Unreason itself is proved by the fact that my memory 
retains an impression, and an accurate one, of virtually 
everything that befell me, except when under the influence 
of an anaesthetic or in the unconscious hours of undisturbed 
sleep. Important events, trifling conversations, and more 
trifling thoughts of my own, are now recalled with ease 
and accuracy; whereas, prior to my illness and up to j 
August 30th, igo2, when I again got in touch with my 
own world, mine was an ordinary memory when it was 
not noticeably poor. At school and in college I stood 
lowest in those studies in which success depended largely 
upon this faculty. Psychiatrists inform me that it is not 
unusual for patients afiiicted as I was to retain accurate 
impressions of their experiences while ill. To laymen this 
may seem almost miraculous, yet it is not so; nor is it even I 
remarkable. Assuming that an insane person's memory is I 
capable of recording impressions at all, remembrance, for \ 
one in the torturing grip of delusions of persecution, should 
be doubly easy. This deduction is in accord with the ac- , 
cepted psychological law : that the retention of an impression 
in the memory depends largely upon the intensity of the im- 
pression itself, and the frequency of its repetition. Fearing 
to speak lest I should incriminate myself and others, gave 
to my impressions the requisite intensity, and the daily re- 
currence of the same general line of thought served to fix all 
impressions in my then supersensitive memory. 



36 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

Shortly before seven in the morning, en route to the sana- 
torium, the train passed through a manufacturing center. 
Many workmen were lounging in front of a factory, most of 
them reading newspapers. I believed these papers con- 
tained an account of me and my crimes, and I thought every- 
one along the route knew who I was and what I was, and 
that I was on that particular train. Few seemed to pay any 
attention to me, yet this very fact looked to be a part of 
some well laid plan of the detectives. 

The sanatorium for which I was destined was situated in 
the country, and when we reached a certain station I was 
carried from the train to a carriage and driven thither. Just 
as we alighted from the train I caught sight of a former col- 
lege acquaintance, whose appearance I thought was designed 
to let me know that Yale, which I believed I had disgraced, 
was one of the powers behind my throne of torture. 

Soon after I reached my room in the sanatorium, the 
supervisor entered. Drawing a table close to the bed he 
placed upon it a slip of paper which he asked me to sign. I 
looked upon this as a trick of the detectives to get a 
specimen of my handwriting. I now know that the signing 
of the slip is a legal requirement, with which every patient is 
supposed to comply upon entering such an institution — 
private in character — unless he has been committed by 
some court. The exact wording of this " voluntary commit- 
ment" I do not now recall; but, in substance, it was an 
agreement to abide by the rules of the institution — what- 
ever they were — and to submit to such restraint as might 
be deemed necessary. Had I not felt the weight of the 
world on my shoulders, I believe my sense of humor would 
have caused me to laugh outright. For the signing of such 
an agreement by one so situated was, even to my mind, a 
farce. After much coaxing I was induced to go so far as to 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 37 

take the pen in my hand. There I hesitated. The super- 
visor apparently thought I might write with more ease if the 
paper were placed on a book. And so I might, had he se- 
lected a book of a different title. One more likely to arouse 
suspicions in my mind could not have been found in a 
search of the Congressional Library. I had left New York 
on June 15 th, and it was now in the direction of that city 
that my present trip had taken me. I considered this but 
the first step of my return under the auspices of the Police 
Department. "Called Back" was the title of the book that 
stared me in the face. After refusing for a long time I 
finally weakened and signed the shp ; but I did not place it 
on the book. To have done that would, in my mind, have 
been tantamount to giving consent to extradition; and I 
was in no mood to assist the detectives in their mean 
work. 



At what cost had I signed that commitment slip? 
To me it was the act of signing my own death-war- 
rant. And why should one in my irresponsible con- 
dition have been forced to undergo so heart-breaking an 
ordeal ? If I was a mental incompetent — and I was — 
why go through a senseless formality, meaningless in the 
eyes of the law which declares an insane person incapable 
of intelligent and binding action? Under such conditions 
a patient should not be annoyed, and in some instances tor- 
tured, by being compelled to attend to the details of his own 
commitment. As well ask the condemned to adjust the 
noose. I am not opposed to " voluntary commitments." 
I simply plead for their confinement to cases in which 
the patient sufficiently appreciates his condition to be 
able to make a choice. If he be past that condition let 



38 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

the law authorize some relative or friend to look after his 
commitment and, together with competent doctors, assume 
the entire responsibility for depriving him of his liberty. 
Though I have ventured one suggestion regarding com- 
mitments, I shall not at this time presume to attack the 
problem involved. Its solution can come only after the 
ablest members of the medical and legal professions have 
given it the consideration it deserves. 



During the entire time that my delusions of persecution, 
as they are called, persisted, I could not but respect the mind 
which had laid out so comprehensive and devihshly ingenious 
and, at times, artistic a "Third Degree," as I was called 
upon to bear. And an innate modesty (more or less fugi- 
tive since these peculiar experiences) does not forbid my 
mentioning the fact that I still respect that mind. 

Suffering, such as I endured during the month of August 
in my own home, continued with gradually lessening force 
during the eight months I remained in this sanatorium. 
Nevertheless my suffering during the first four of these eight 
months was intense. All my senses were still perverted. My 
sense of sight was the first to right itself — nearly enough, at 
least, to rob the detectives of their moving pictures. But, be- 
fore the last fitful film had run through my mind, I beheld 
one which I shall now describe. I can trace it directly to 
an impression made on my memory about two years earlier, 
when I was still sane. 

Shortly after going to New York to live I had explored the 
Eden Musee. One of the most grewsome of the spectacles 
which I had seen in its famed Chamber of Horrors was a 
representation of a gorilla, holding in its arms the gory body 
of a woman. It was that impression which now revived 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 



39 



in my mind. But, by a process strictly in accordance with 
Darwin's theory, the Eden Musee gorilla had become a man 
— in appearance, not unlike the beast that had inspired my 
distorted thought. This man held a bloody dagger which 
he repeatedly plunged into the woman's breast. The appa- 
rition did not terrify me at all. In fact I found it interesting, 
for I looked upon it as a contrivance of the detectives. Its 
purpose I could not imagine, and it distressed me the less 
as I reasoned that no additional criminal charges could make 
my situation worse than it already was. 

For a month or two, "false voices" continued to annoy 
me. And if there is a hell conducted on the principles of my 
temporary hell, gossipers will one day wish they had attended 
strictly to their own business. This is not a confession. I 
am no gossiper, though I cannot deny that I have occa- 
sionally gossiped — a little. And this was my punishment : 
persons in an adjoining room seemed to be repeating with 
reference to me the very same things which I had said of 
others on these communicative occasions. I supposed that 
those whom I had talked about had in some way found me 
out, and intended now to take their revenge. If aU makers 
of idle talk could be put through such a corrective course, 
idle talkers would be abolished from the earth. 

My sense of smell, too, became normal; but my sense 
of taste was slow in recovering. At each meal, poison was 
still the pihe de resistance, and it was not surprising that I 
sometimes dallied one, two, or three hours over a meal, and 
often ended by not eating it at all. 

There was, however, another reason for my frequent 
refusal to take food, in my belief that the detectives had 
resorted to a more subtle method of detection. They now 
intended by each article of food to suggest a certain idea, 
and I was expected to recognize the idea thus suggested. 



40 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

Conviction or acquittal depended upon my correct interpre- 
tation of their symbols, and my interpretation was to be 
signified by my eating, or not eating, the several kinds of 
food placed before me. To have eaten a burnt crust of 
bread would have been a confession of arson. Why? 
Simply because the charred crust suggested fire; and, as 
bread is the staff of life, would it not be an inevitable 
deduction that life had been destroyed — destroyed by fire 
— and that I was the destroyer ? On one day to eat a 
given article of food meant confession. The next day, or 
the next meal, a refusal to eat it meant confession. This 
complication of logic made it doubly difficult for me to 
keep from incriminating myself and others. 

It can easily be seen that I was between several devils and 
the deep sea. To eat or not to eat, perplexed me more than 
the problem conveyed by a few shorter words perplexed a 
certain prince, who, had he lived a few centuries later (out 
of a book) might have been forced to enter a kingdom where 
kings and princes are made and unmade on short notice. 
Indeed, he might have lost his principality entirely — or, 
at least, his subjects; for as I later had occasion to observe, 
the frequency with which a dethroned reason mounts a throne 
and rules a world is such that self-crowned royalty in asylums 
for the insane receives but scant homage from the less elated 
members of the court. 

For several weeks I ate but little. Though the desire for 
food was not wanting, my mind (that dog-in-the-manger) 
refused to let me satisfy my hunger. Coaxing by the attend- 
ants was of little avail; force was usually of less. But the 
threat that liquid nourishment would be administered 
through my nostrils sometimes prevailed, for the attribute 
of shrewdness was not so utterly lost that I could not choose 
the less of two evils. 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 41 

What I looked upon as a gastronomic ruse of the detec- 
tives sometimes overcame my fear of eating. Every Sunday 
ice-cream was served with dinner. At the beginning of the 
meal a large pyramid of it would be placed before me in a 
saucer several sizes too small. I believed that it was never 
to be mine unless I first partook of the more substantial 
fare. As I dallied over the meal, that delicious pyramid 
would gradually melt, slowly filling the small saucer, which 
I knew could not long continue to hold all of its original 
contents. As this liquefying process advanced I became 
more indifferent to my eventual fate; and, invariably, before 
a drop of that precious reward had dripped from the saucer, 
I had eaten enough of the dinner to prove my title to the 
seductive dessert. Moreover, during its enjoyment, I no 
longer cared a whit for charges or convictions of all the 
crimes on the calendar. This fact is less trifling than it 
seems; for it proves the value of strategy as opposed to 
brute and sometimes brutal force, of which I shall presently 
give some illuminating examples. 



VII 

For the first few weeks after my arrival at the sanatorium, 
I was cared for by two attendants, one by day and one by 
night. I was still helpless, being unable to put my feet out 
of bed, much less upon the floor, and it was necessary 
that I be continually watched, lest an impulse to walk should 
seize me. After a month or six weeks I grew stronger, and 
from that time had but one attendant, who was with me all 
day, and, at night, slept in the same room. 

The earliest possible dismissal of one of my two attendants 
was expedient for the family purse; for the charges at this, 
as at all other sanatoriums operated for private gain, are 
nothing less than extortionate. But such are the deficiencies 
in the prevailing treatment of the insane that relief in one 
respect occasions evil in another. No sooner was the num- 
ber of attendants thus reduced than I was subjected to a 
detestable form of restraint which amounted to torture. To 
guard me against myself while my remaining attendant slept, 
my hands were imprisoned in what is known as a "muff." 
A "muff," innocent enough to the eyes of those who have 
never worn one, is in reality a rehc of the Inquisition. It 
is an instrument of restraint which has been in use for cen- 
turies among ignorant practitioners, and even in many of 
our public and private institutions is still in use. Such an 
incident as I am about to recount cannot occur in a properly 
conducted institution, and that fact made its occurrence a 
crime, though perhaps an unintentional one; for good 
motives bom of professional ignorance are little, if at all, 

42 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 43 

better than deliberate bad intention. The muff I wore was 
made of canvas, and differed in construction from a muff 
designed for the hands of fashion only in the inner partition, 
also of canvas, which separated my hands but allowed 
them to overlap. At either end was a strap which buckled 
tightly around the wrist and was locked. 

The assistant physician, when he announced to me that 
I was to be subjected every night to this restraint, broke the 
news gently — so gently that I did not then know, nor did I 
guess for several months, why this thing was done to me. 
And thus it was that I drew deductions of my own which 
added not a little to my torture. I have already suggested 
that an insane person should be treated as sane in all the \ 
ways that are possible. It is a mistaken delicacy of feeling \ 
which impels doctors and others in charge to avoid any direct 
reference to a patient's insanity in the presence of the patient / 
himself. I believe it would have mitigated my distress to ' 
have been told in plain English that I was insane and had, 
because of that condition, attempted suicide. To be sure I 
should perhaps have regarded those about me as suffering 1 
under a strange delusion, but I believe that the reason for ' 
their behavior would have wormed its way into my under- 
standing months earlier than it did. 

However, the physician in charge was really trying, so far 
as he knew how, to do a very disagreeable thing as delicately 
as possible. The gas-jet in my room was situated at a dis- 
tance, and stronger light was needed to find the keyholes 
and lock the muff when adjusted. Hence, an attendant 
was standing by with a lighted candle. Seating himself on 
the side of the bed the physician said: "You won't try again 
to do what you did in New Haven, will you?" Now one 
may have done many things in a city where he has lived for 
a score of years, and it is not surprising that I failed to catch 



44 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

the meaning of the doctor's question. It was only after 
months of secret puzzling that I at last did discover his refer- 
ence to my attempted suicide. But now the burning candle 
in the hands of the attendant, and a certain similarity be- 
tween the doctor's name and the name of a man once accused 
of arson, led me to imagine that in some way I had been 
connected with that crime; and for months I firmly believed 
I stood charged as an accomplice. 

The putting on of the muff was the most humiliating in- 
cident of my life. The shaving of my legs and the wearing 
on my brow of the court-plaster brand of infamy had been 
humiliating, but those experiences had not overwhelmed my 
very heart as did this bitter ordeal. I resisted weakly, and, 
after the muff was adjusted and locked, for the first time 
since my mental collapse, I wept. And I remember distinctly 
why I wept. The key that locked the muff imlocked in 
imagination the door of the home in New Haven which I be- 
lieved I had disgraced, — and seemed for a time to unlock 
my heart. Anguish beat my mind into a momentary sanity, 
and with a wholly sane emotion I keenly felt my imagined 
disgrace. As is usual under such circumstances my thoughts 
centered on my mother. Her (and other members of 
the family) I could plainly see at home in a state of dejection 
and despair over her imprisoned and heartless son. I wore 
the muff each night for several weeks, and for the first few 
nights the unhappy glimpses of a ruined home recurred and 
increased my suffering. 

It was not always as an instrument of restraint that the 
muff was employed. Frequently it was used as a means of 
discipline, on account of supposed stubborn disobedience to 
the attendant. Many times was I roughly overpowered by 
two attendants who locked my hands and coerced me to 
do whatever I had refused to do. My arms and hands were 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 45 

my only weapons of defense. My feet were still in plaster 
casts, and my back had been so severely injured as to neces- 
sitate my lying flat upon it most of the time. It was so 
that these unequal fights were fought. And I had not even 
the satisfaction of tongue-lashing my oppressors for I was 
practically speechless. 

My attendants, like most others in such institutions, were 
ill- qualified to understand the operations of my mind, and 
what they could not understand they would seldom tolerate. 
Yet they were not entirely to blame. They were simply 
carrying out to the letter, orders which they had received 
from_J;he doctors. In fact one of these attendants later 
became so disgusted with the continued exercise of unfair- 
ness toward me that he secretly favored me by refraining 
from force when I refused to do certain things which he 
knew would annoy and distress me. 

To ask a patient in my condition to take a little medicated 
sugar seemed reasonable. I concede that; and my refusal 
was exasperating. Had I been in the place of my keepers, 
and they in mine, I might have acted no more wisely than 
they. But, from my point of view, my refusal was justifiable. 
That innocuous sugar disc to me seemed saturated with the 
blood of loved ones ; and so much as to touch it was to shed 
their blood — perhaps on the very scaffold on which I was 
destined to die. For myself I cared little. I was anxious 
to die, and eagerly would I have taken the sugar disc had I 
had any reason to believe that it was deadly poison. The 
sooner I could die and be forgotten the better for all with 
whom I had ever come in contact. To continue to live 
was simply to be the treacherous tool of unscrupulous detec- 
tives, eager to exterminate my innocent relatives and 
friends, if so their fame could be made secure in the annals 
of their craft. 



46 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

But the thoughts associated with the taking of the medicine 
were seldom twice alike. If, before it, something happened 
to remind me of mother, father, a relative, or a friend, I 
imagined that compliance would compromise, if not even- 
tually destroy, that particular person. Who would not 
resist when meek acceptance would be a confession which 
would doom his own mother or father to prison, or ignominy, 
or death ? It was for this that I was reviled, for this, sub- 
jected to cruel restraint. 

Let those in charge of such institutions, who have a stub- 
born patient to deal with, remember what I say. In the 
strict sense of the word there is no such thing as a 
genuinely stubborn insane person. The stubborn men 
and women in the world are sane; and the fortunate 
prevalence of sanity may be approximately estimated by 
the preponderance of stubbornness in society at large. 
When one possessed of the blessed means of resolving 
his own errors continues to cherish an unreasonable be- 
lief — that is stubbornness. But for a man bereft of reason 
to adhere to an idea which to him seems absolutely correct 
and true because he has been deprived of the means of detect- 
ing his error — that is not stubbornness. It is a symptom 
of his disease, and merits the indulgence of forbearance, if 
not genuine sympathy. Certainly the afflicted one deserves 
no punishment. As well punish with a slap the cheek that 
is disfigured by the mumps. 

The attendant who was with me most of the time that I 
remained at the sanatorium was a young man of about my 
own age. He had never before worked in an institution of 
that character, though he had acted as a nurse and com- 
panion in cases where the patient could be treated at home. 
Him I regarded as a detective, or, rather, as two detectives, 
one of whom watched me by day, and the other — a perfect 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 47 

double — by night. He was an enemy, and his professed 
sympathy — which I now know was genuine — only made 
me hate him the more. As he was ignorant of the methods 
of treatment in vogue in hospitals for the insane it was several 
weeks before this exceptional attendant dared put in jeop- 
ardy his position by presuming to shield me against unwise 
orders of the doctors. But when at last he awoke to the 
situation he repeatedly interposed in my behalf. More 
than once the doctor who was both owner and superintend- 
ent, threatened to discharge him for alleged ofhciousness. 
But better judgment usually held the doctor's wrath in 
check, for he realized that not one attendant in a hundred 
was so competent. It was indeed contrary to custom (for 
in this matter attendants are unlike trained nurses in general 
hospitals) that this attendant should take a lively personal 
interest in me. Surely it was not the paltry and insulting 
four and a half dollars a week that induced him to work 
under such doctors, and in an institution which he de- 
tested. Such orders as he modified were without exception 
unfair, and for exercising his superior judgment he deserves 
no criticism. He was unconsciously an advocate of Non- 
Restraint, working in an institution where Restraint was 
tolerated and pretty freely used. Naturally there was 
friction, for Restraint is as a cinder in the eye of one 
who appreciates the advantages of humane treatment. 

Not only did my attendant frequently exhibit more wis- 
dom than the superintendent, but he also obeyed the dictates 
of a better conscience than that of his nominal superior, the 
assistant physician, as the following incident will prove. 
On three occasions this assistant physician treated me with 
a signal lack of consideration, and in at least one instance 
he was \acious. When this latter incident occurred I was, 
both physically and mentally, helpless. My feet were swollen 



48 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

and still in plaster bandages. I was all but mute, uttering 
only an occasional expletive when forced to do things against 
my will. 

One morning Doctor No-name (he represents a t3^e) en- 
tered my room. 

"Good-morning! How are you feeling?" he asked. 

No answer. 

"Aren't you feeling well?" 

No answer. 

"Why don't you talk?" said he with irritation. 

Still no answer, except perhaps a contemptuous look such 
as is so often the essence of eloquence. Suddenly, and with- 
out the slightest warning, as a petulant child locked in a room 
for disobedience might treat a pillow, he seized my arm and 
jerked me from the bed. It was wonderful that the bones of 
my ankles and feet, not yet thoroughly knitted, were not 
again broken. And this was the performance of the very 
man who had locked my hands in the "muff," that I 
might not injure myself! 

I uttered not a word, — not even the usual automatic 
expletive. 

"Why don't you talk?" he again asked. 

Though rather slow in replying (it has now been over 
seven years), I will take pleasure in doing so by sending that 
doctor a copy of this book — my answer — if he will but 
send me his address. This physician left the sanatorium 
about two years after I did. That such a man could con- 
tinue in so responsible a position, for so long, indicates the 
little care generally exercised by owners of sanatoriums in 
the selection of their assistants. 

It is not a pleasant duty to brand any physician for cruelty 
and incompetence, for the worst that ever lived has un- 
doubtedly done many good deeds. But here is the type of 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 49 

man that has wrought havoc among the helpless insane — 
a type which unfortunately is still too often found (only not 
found soon enough) in our private and public institutions. 
It therefore seems but fair that the men whose destiny put 
them in touch with one who has lived to publish his story 
should at least bear the brunt of illustration. 



VIII 

My escape from death when I dropped from the window- 
is hardly more remarkable than the perfect present condi- 
tion of my feet and ankles, which were that day so seriously 
injured. The fact that I am not now a cripple I ascribe to 
two causes. First : to God — or Providence, or Fate, or luck, 
if you choose. And second: such earthly praise as may be 
properly bestowed belongs to the physician who, with con- 
summate skill, set my broken bones. 

It was at the sanatorium that my ankles were finally re- 
stored to a semblance of their former utility. They were 
there subjected to a course of heroic treatment; but as to-day 
they permit me to walk, run, and dance, as those do who 
have never been crippled, my hours of torture endured under 
my first attempts to walk are almost pleasant to recall. 
About five months from the date of my fall I was allowed, 
or rather compelled, to place my feet on the floor and at- 
tempt to walk. They were still swollen, absolutely with- 
out action, and acutely sensitive to the slightest pressure. 
From the time my feet were injured, until I again began 
to talk — two years later — I asked not one question as to 
the probability of my ever regaining the use of them. The 
fact was, I never expected to walk naturally again. The 
doctor's desire to have me walk I believed to be inspired by 
the detectives, of whom, indeed, I supposed the doctor him- 
self to be one. Had there been any confession to make I 
am sure it would have been yielded under the stress of this 
ultimate torture. The million needle points which, just 

5° 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 51 

prior to my mental collapse, seemed to goad my brain, now 
centered their unwelcome attention on the soles of my feet. 
Had the floor been studded with minute stilettoes my suffer- 
ings could hardly have been more intense. For several weeks 
assistance was necessary with each attempt to walk, and 
each attempt was an ordeal. Every drop of blood in my 
body seemed to find an irresistible attraction at the points 
of pain. Sweat stood in beads on either foot, wrung from 
my blood by agony. Believing that it would be only a 
question of time when I should be tried, condemned, and 
executed for some one of my countless felonies, I looked 
upon the attempt to prevent my continuing a cripple for 
the brief remainder of my days as prompted by anything 
but benevolence. 

I find no fault with the heroic treatment which necessi- 
tated the bearing of my weight on my feet at that time; but 
I do think the superintendent of this sanatorium would have 
proved himself more himiane had he not peremptorily or- 
dered my attendant to discontinue the use of a support which, 
until the plaster bandages were removed, had enabled me 
to keep my legs in a horizontal position during those hours 
of the day that I sat in a chair. His order was that I 
should put my legs down and keep them down, whether it 
caused me suffering or not. The pain was of course intense 
when the blood again began to circulate freely through tis- 
sues long imused to its full pressure, and so evident was 
my distress that the attendant disregarded the doctor's com- 
mand.^ He would remove the forbidden support for only a 
few minutes at a time, gradually lengthening the intervals 
until at last I was able to do without the support entirely. 
But, while favoring me, he had to remain on watch to guard 

' I am here corroborated by the sworn statement of the attendant who has 
given me an affidavit which covers all incidents in which he played a part. 



52 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

against discovery. Each day for several weeks I was forced 
at first to stagger and finally to walk across the room and 
back to the bed. The distance was increased as the pain 
diminished, until I was able to walk without more discomfort 
than a comparatively pleasant sensation of lameness. For 
at least two months after I first touched my feet to the floor 
attendants had to carry me up and down stairs, and for 
several months longer I went flat-footed. 

Delusions of persecution — which include "delusions of 
self -reference " — though a source of annoyance while J was 
in an inactive state, annoyed and distressed me even more 
when I began to move about and was obliged to associate 
with other patients. To my mind not only were the doctors 
and attendants detectives; each patient was a detective and 
the whole institution was a part of the "Third Degree." 
Scarcely any remark was made in my presence that I could 
not twist into a cleverly veiled reference to myseK. In each 
person I could see a resemblance to persons I had known, or 
to the principals or victims of the crimes with which I 
imagined myself charged. I refused to read, for to read 
veiled charges and fail to assert my innocence was to 
incriminate both myself and others. But I looked with 
longing glances upon all printed matter and, as my curiosity 
was continuafly piqued, this enforced abstinence grew to be 
well-nigh intolerable. 

It became again highly expedient to the family purse, upon 
which my illness was so serious a drain, that every possible 
saving be made. Therefore I was transferred from the main 
building, where I had a private room and a special attend- 
ant, to a ward where I was to mingle, imder an aggregate 
sort of supervision, with fifteen or twenty other patients. 
Here I had no special attendant by day, though one slept 
in my room at night. 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 53 

Of this ward I had heard alarming reports — and these 
from the lips of several attendants. I was therefore greatly 
disturbed at the proposed change. But, the transfer once 
accomplished, after a few days I really liked my new quar- 
ters better than the old. During the entire time I remained 
at the sanatorium I was more alert mentally than I gave 
evidence of being. But not until after my removal to this 
ward where I was left alone for hours every day did I dare 
to give evidence of my alertness. Here I even went so far 
on one occasion as to joke with my new attendant. He 
had been trying to persuade me to take a bath. I refused, 
mainly because I did not like the looks of the bath-room, 
which, with its cement floor and central drain, resembled 
the washing-room of an improved stable. After all else 
had failed the attendant tried the role of sympathizer. 

"Now I know just how you feel," said he, "I can put 
myself in your place." 

"Well, if you can, do it and take the bath yourself," said I. 

The remark is brilliant by contrast with the dismal source 
from which it escaped. "Escaped" is the word, for the 
fear that I should hasten my trial by exhibiting too great a 
gain in health, mental or physical, was already upon me; and 
it controlled much of my conduct during the succeeding 
months of despondency. 

Having now no special attendant I spent many hours in 
my room, alone, but not absolutely alone, for somewhere 
the eye of a detective was evermore upon me. I soon 
fancied that my case had been transferred from the State 
to the Federal authorities, and the fear of an all-powerful 
Secret Service did not tend to ease my laboring imagination. 
Comparative solitude, however, gave me courage and soon 
I began to read, regardless of consequences. During the 
entire period of my depression, every publication seemed to 



54 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

have been written and printed for me, and me alone. Books, 
magazines, and newspapers seemed to be special editions. 
The fact that I well knew how inordinate would be the cost 
of such a procedure in no way shook my faith in it. In- 
) deed, that I was costing my persecutors fabulous sums of 

- money was a source of secret satisfaction — a psychological 
phenomenon, perhaps associated with delusions of grandeur 
which long afterwards asserted themselves. During the earH- 
est stages of my illness I had lost count of time, and the 
calendar did not right itself until the day when I largely 
regained my reason. Meanwhile, the date on each newspaper 
was, according to my reckoning, two weeks out of the way. 
This confirmed my belief in the special editions as a part of 
the "Third Degree." 

Most sane people think that no insane person can reason 
logically. But this is not so. Upon unreasonable prem- 

,- ises I made most reasonable deductions, and that at the time 
when my mind was in its most disturbed condition. Had 

; the papers which I read on the day which I supposed to be 
February ist borne a January date, I might not then, for 
so long a time, have believed in a special edition. Probably 
I should have inferred that the regular editions had been 
held back. But the papers I had were dated about two 
weeks ahead. Now if a sane person on February ist re- 
ceive a newspaper dated February 14th, he will be fully jus- 
tified in thinking something wrong, either with the paper or 
with himself. But the shifted calendar which had planted 
itself in my mind meant as much to me as the true calendar 
does to any sane business man. During the seven hundred 
and ninety-eight days of depression I drew countless incor- 
rect deductions. But such as they were they were deduc- 
tions, and the mental process was not other than that which 
takes place in a well-ordered mind. 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 55 

My gradually increasing vitality, although it increased my 
fear of trial, impelled me to take new risks. I began to 
read not only newspapers, but also such books as were placed 
within my reach. Yet had they not been placed there I should 
have gone without them, for I would never ask even for 
what I greatly desired and knew I could have for the asking. 

Whatever love of literature I now have dates from this 
time, when I was a mental incompetent and confined. Lying 
on a shelf in my room was a large volume of George Eliot's 
works. For several days I cast longing glances at the book 
and finally plucked up the courage to take little nibbles now 
and then. These were so good that I grew bold and at last 
began to read the book openly. Its contents at the time 
made but little impression on my mind, but I enjoyed it. I 
read also some of Addison's essays ; and had I been fortunate 
enough to have read these earlier in life I might have been 
spared the delusion that I could detect in many passages the 
altering hand of my persecutors. 



The friendly attendant, from whom I was now separated, 
tried upon all occasions to send his favors after me into my 
new quarters. At first he came in person to see me, but the 
superintendent soon forbade that, and also ordered him not 
to communicate with me in any way. It was this, and other 
differences naturally arising between such a doctor and such 
an attendant, that soon brought about the discharge of the 
latter. But " discharge" is hardly the word, for the attendant 
had become disgusted with the institution, and had remained 
so long only because of his interest in me. When he left, he 
informed the owner that he would soon cause my removal 
from the institution. This he did. He persuaded my rela- 
tives to let him care for me in his own home. I left the sana- 



56 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

torium in March, 1901, and remained for three months in the 
home of my former attendant who lived with a grandmother 
and an aunt in a small town not far from New Haven. 

It is not to be inferred that I entertained any affection for 
my friendly keeper. I continued to regard him as an enemy; 
and my life at his home became a monotonous round of 
displeasures. I took my three meals a day. I would sit 
listlessly for hours at a time in the house. Daily I went out 

— attended, of course — for short walks about the town. 
These were not enjoyable. I beheved everybody was 
famihar with my black record and expected me to be put to 
death. Indeed, I wondered why passers-by did not revile or 
even stone me. Once I was sure I heard a little girl call me 
"Traitor!" That, I believe, was my last "false voice," but 
it made such an impression that I can even now recall 
vividly the appearance of that dreadful child. 

During these three months I again refused to read books, 
though they were within reach, and I returned to newspapers 

— probably because I feared to indicate too much improve- 
ment and thus hasten my trial. 

My attendant and his relatives were very kind and very 
patient — for I was still intractable. But their efforts to 
make me comfortable, so far as they had any effect, made 
keener my desire for death at my own hands. I shrank 
from death; — but I preferred to die by my own hand and 
take the blame for it, rather than to be executed and bring 
lasting disgrace on my family, friends, and I may add with 
truth, on Yale. For I reasoned that parents throughout the 
country would withhold their sons from a university which 
numbered among its graduates such a despicable being as I. 
But from any tragic act I was providentially restrained by the 
very delusion which gave birth to the desire, — in a way which 
signally appeared on a later and, to me, memorable day. 



IX 

I AM in a position not unlike that of a man whose obituary 
notice has appeared prematurely. Few men have ever had 
a better opportunity than I to test the quality of their rel- 
atives' affection, and similarly to test their friends. That 
my relatives and friends did their duty and did it willingly 
is naturally a constant source of satisfaction to me. Indeed, 
I believe that that unbroken record of devotion is one of the 
factors which have made it possible for me to take up again 
my duties in the social and business world with a comfort- 
able feeling of continuity. I can now view my past with as 
much complacency as does the man whose life has been uni- 
formly uneventful. 

As I have seen scores of insane persons neglected by their 
relatives — a neglect which recovered patients resent and 
often brood upon — my sense of gratitude is the livelier, and 
especially so because of the difficulty with which friendly in- 
tercourse with me was maintained during two of the three 
years I was ill. Relatives and friends frequently called to see 
me. True, these calls were trying for all concerned. I spoke 
to none, not even to my mother and father. For, though they 
all appeared about as they used to appear, I was able to de- 
tect some slight difference in look or gesture, and this was 
enough to confirm my belief that they were impersonators, 
engaged in a conspiracy, not merely to entrap me, but to 
incriminate those whom they impersonated. It is not 
strange, then, that I refused to have anything to say to them, 
or to permit them to come near me. To have kissed the 

57 



58 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

woman who was my mother, but whom I believed to be a 
Federal conspirator, would have been an act of betrayal. 
These interviews were much harder for my relatives and 
friends than for me. But even to me they were in the nature 
of ordeals; and though I suffered less at these particular 
moments than my callers did, my sum of suffering was greater, 
for I was constantly anticipating these unwelcome but event- 
ually beneficial visitations. 

Suppose my relatives and friends had held aloof during 
this apparently hopeless period, what to-day would be my 
feelings toward them? Let others answer. For over two 
years I considered all letters forgeries. Yet the day came 
when I convinced myself of their genuineness and the gen- 
uineness of the love of those who sent them. Perhaps some 
of the persons related to the two hundred thousand victims of 
insanity in this country to-day will find some comfort in this 
fact. To be on the safe and humane side let every sane rel- 
ative and friend of persons so afflicted remember the Golden 
Rule, which has never been suspended with respect to the 
insane. Go to see them, with as much of the light of sanity 
as you possess; treat them sanely, write them sane letters; 
keep them informed about the home-circle; let not your devo- 
tion flag, nor accept any repulse. There is a sure reward — 
sometime — somewhere. 



The consensus of opinion now was that my condition was 
unlikely ever to improve, and the question of my commit- 
ment to some institution where incurable cases could be 
treated came up for decision. While it was being consid- 
ered my attendant kept assuring me that it would be unnec- 
essary to commit me to an institution if I would only show 
some improvement. For that purpose he repeatedly sug- 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 59 

gested that I go to New Haven and spend a day at home. 
I did finally indicate my willingness to make the trip; and 
nothing proves more conclusively my dread of a hospital 
for the insane than my action that day. I did not wish to 
go to New Haven. I dreaded doing so. To my best knowl- 
edge and belief I had no home there, nor did I have any 
relatives or friends who would greet me upon my return. 
How could they, if still free, even approach me, while I was 
surrounded by detectives? Then, too, I had a lurking sus- 
picion that my attendant's offer was made in the belief that 
I would not dare accept it. By taking him at his word I 
knew that I should at least have an opportunity to test the 
truth of many of his statements regarding my old home. Life 
had become insupportable ; and back of my consent to return 
was a willingness to beard the detectives in their own den, 
regardless of consequences. With these and many other 
reflections I started for the train. The events of the journey 
which followed are of no moment. We soon reached the 
New Haven station; and, as I had expected, no relative or 
friend was there to greet us. This apparent indifference of 
relatives seemed to support my suspicion that my attendant 
had not told me the truth; but I found little satisfaction in 
uncovering his deceit, for the more of a liar I proved him to 
be, the worse would be my position. We walked to the front 
of the station and stood there for almost half an hour. The 
unfortunate but perfectly natural wording of a question 
caused the delay. 

"Well, shall we go home?" said my attendant. 

How could I say "Yes"? I had no home. I feel sure 
I should finally have said "No," had he continued to put 
the question in that form. Consciously or unconsciously, 
however, he altered it. "Shall we go to 30 Trumbull 
Street?" That was what I had been waiting for. Cer- 



6o A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

tainly I would go to the house designated by that number. 
I had come to New Haven to see that house; and I had just 
a faint hope that its appearance and the appearance of its 
occupants might prove convincing. 

At home my visit came as a complete surprise. I could 
not believe that my relatives — if they were relatives — had 
not been informed of my presence in the city, and their 
words and actions upon my arrival confirmed suspicion and 
killed the faint hope I had briefly cherished. My hosts were 
simply the same old persecutors with whom I had already 
had too much to do. Soon after my arrival dinner was 
served. I sat at my old place at the table, and secretly 
admired the skill with which he who asked the blessing 
imitated the language and the well-remembered intonation 
of my father's voice. But alas! for the family — I im- 
agined my relatives banished and languishing in prison, 
and the old home confiscated by the government! 



X 

Though my few hours at home failed to prove that I did 
not belong in an institution, it served one good purpose. Cer- 
tain relatives who had objected to my commitment now 
agreed that there was no alternative, and, accordingly, my 
eldest brother caused himself to be appointed my conservator. 
He had long favored taking such action, but other relatives 
counseled delay. They had been deterred by that inbred 
dread of seeing a member of the family branded by law as a 
mental incompetent, and, to a degree, stigmatized by an im- 
questionably mistaken public opinion. The very thought was 
repugnant; and a mistaken sense of duty — and perhaps a 
suggestion of pride — led them to wish me out of such an 
institution as long as possible. 

Though at the time I dreaded commitment, it was the best 
possible thing that could befall me; and I wish to emphasize 
this fact in order that others, situated as my relatives were, 
may have fewer misgivings. In most instances an insane 
person is more likely to recover in a reputable institution 
than he is if kept in touch with the world he knew while 
sane. To be in the world and not of it is exasperating. The 
constant friction that is inevitable under such conditions — 
conditions such as existed for me in the home of my attend- 
ant — can only aggravate the mental disturbance. Par- 
ticularly is this true of those laboring under delusions of 
persecution. Such delusions multiply with the complexity of 
the life led. It is the even-going routine of institutional life 
which affords the indispensable quieting effect — provided 

6i 



62 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

that routine is well ordered, and not defeated by annoyances 
imposed by ignorant or indifferent doctors and attendants. 

My commitment occurred on June nth, 1901. The insti- 
tution to which I was committed is considered one of the 
best of its kind in the country; and the conditions there are 
to be found in a greater or less degree in most other such 
institutions in every State in the Union. For that reason it is 
not necessary that I name it. I am not writing an expose of 
the three hospitals in which I was confined. The evils 
they represent are almost universal, and I do not propose to 
becloud the main issue, which is the need of a movement 
to eliminate these evils everywhere. For this reason and, 
in some instances, for charity's sake, I suppress the names 
of those who were in authority over me. 

The institution itself was well situated. Though the 
view was a restricted one, a vast expanse of lawn, surrounded 
by groups of trees — patches of primeval forest — gave the 
place an atmosphere which was not without its remedial 
value. My quarters were comfortable, and, after a little, 
I adjusted myself to my new environment. A description 
of the daily routine will, I believe, serve to dispel many mis- 
taken ideas regarding the life led by the inmates of such 
institutions. 

Breakfast was served about 7.30 a.m., though the hour 
varied somewhat according to the season — earlier in sum- 
mer and later in winter. In the spring, summer, and fall, 
when the weather was favorable, those able to go out of doors 
were taken after breakfast for walks within the grounds, or 
were allowed to roam about the lawn and sit under the trees, 
where they remained for an hour or two at a time. Dinner 
was usually served shortly after noon, and then the active 
patients were again taken out of doors, where they remained 
an hour or two doing much as they pleased, but under the 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 63 

eyes of attendants. About half -past three they returned to 
their respective wards, there to remain until the next day — 
except those who cared to attend the religious service which 
was held almost every afternoon in an endowed chapel. 
Few such institutions in this country have religious services 
every day. But Dr. Theodore B. Hyslop, Superintendent 
of Bethlem Royal Hospital (London, England), a specialist 
in neurology and in the treatment of mental diseases, goes 
so far as to say: "Of all hygienic measures to counteract 
disturbed sleep, depressed spirits, and all the miserable 
sequels of a distressed mind I would undoubtedly give the 
first place to the simple habit of prayer." 

Preachers of the gospel should appreciate this fact, and be 
oftener seen working among the insane. 

In all institutions those confined in different wards go to 
bed at different hours. The patients in the best wards re- 
tire at nine or ten o'clock. Those in the wards where more 
troublesome cases are treated go to bed usually at seven or 
eight o'clock. I, while undergoing treatment, have retired 
at all hours, so that I am in the better position to describe 
the mysteries of what is, in a way, one of the greatest secret 
societies in the world. 

I soon became accustomed to the rather agreeable rou- 
tine, and began to enjoy life as much as a man could with the 
cloud of death hanging over him, — for I still suffered the 
constant dread of being removed to court, to prison, and to 
the gallows or the electric- chair. But my living was hardly 
life; yet, had I not been burdened with the delusions which 
held me a prisoner of the police, and kept me a stranger to 
my old world, I should have been able to enjoy a compara- 
tively happy existence in spite of all. 

This new feeling of comparative contentment had not 
been brought about by any decided improvement in health. 



64 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

It was due directly and entirely to an environment more 
nearly in tune with my ill-tuned mind. While surrounded 
by sane people my mental inferiority had been pain- 
fully apparent to me, as well as to others. Here a feeling 
of superiority easily asserted itself, for many of my asso- 
ciates were, to my mind, vastly inferior to myself. But this 
stimulus did not affect me at once. For several weeks I 
believed the institution to be peopled by detectives, feigning 
insanity. The government was still operating the "Third 
Degree," only on a grander scale. Nevertheless, I did soon 
come to the conclusion that the institution was what it pro- 
fessed to be — still cherishing the idea, however, that cer- 
tain patients and attaches were detectives, — an idea which 
persisted until my period of depression came to an end. 
From June nth, 1901, when I first arrived at this hospital, to 
August 30th, 1902, when the active and troublesome phase of 
my illness began, I was treated with consideration by doc- 
tors and attendants alike. Fortunately, in all hospitals for 
the insane, patients in a passive condition are pretty likely 
to receive kind treatment. 

For a while after my arrival I again abandoned my new- 
found reading habit. But as I became accustomed to my 
surroundings I grew bolder and resumed my devotion 
to the newspapers and to such books as were at hand. There 
was a bookcase in the ward, filled with old numbers of 
standard English periodicals ; among them : Westminster Re- 
view, Edinburgh Review, London Quarterly, and Blackwood's. 
There were also copies of Harper's, Scribner's and The Atlan- 
tic Monthly, dated a generation or more before my first read- 
ing days. Indeed, some of the reviews were over fifty years 
old. But I had to read their heavy contents or go without 
reading, for I would not yet ask even for a thing I desired. 
In the room of one of the patients were thirty or forty books 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 65 

belonging to him. Time and again I walked by his door and 
cast a longing glance at those books, which at first I had not 
the courage to ask for or to take. But during the summer, 
about the time I was getting desperate, I finally managed to 
summon enough courage to take books surreptitiously, and, I 
confess, it was usually while the owner of these books was at- 
tending the daily service in the chapel that his Hbrary became 
a circulating one. 

Though this institution, unlike most institutions, had a 
library, presented and endowed by a person interested in 
the work that was being done there, that library, which was 
kept in an adjoining ward, afforded me no pleasure until I 
had become sane enough to ask for favors. Later investi- 
gation has convinced me that the libraries in existence 
in hospitals for the insane are not made the most of; for it 
frequently happens that those most desirous of reading are 
least likely to ask for books. Instead of being kept in 
one ward books should be distributed and re-distributed 
throughout the several wards. The slight chance of their 
being damaged or destroyed is more than offset by the good 
they may do. 

The contents of the books I read made perhaps more of 
an impression on my memory than most books make on the 
minds of normal readers. To assure myself of the fact I 
have since re-read "The Scarlet Letter," and I recognize 
it as an old friend. The first part of the story, however, 
wherein Hawthorne describes his work as a Custom House 
official and portrays his literary personality, seems to have 
made scarcely any impression. This I attribute to my utter 
lack of literary interest at that time in writers and their 
methods. I then had no desire to write a book, or any 
thought of ever doing so. Not until the day I regained my 
reason, were my literary ambitions bom. 

6 



66 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

Letters I looked upon with suspicion. I never read them 
at the time they were received. I would not even open 
them; but generally, after a week or sometimes a month, I 
would secretly open and read them — forgeries of the 
detectives. 

I still refused to speak, and exhibited physical activity 
only when the patients were taken out of doors. For hours 
I would sit reading books or papers, or apparently doing 
nothing. But my mind was in an active state and very 
sensitive. As the event proved, everything done or said 
within the range of my senses was making indelible impres- 
sions, though these at the time were frequently of such a char- 
acter that I experienced great difficulty in trying to recall 
incidents which I thought I might find useful at the time of 
my appearance in court. 

My ankles had not regained anything like their former 
strength. It hurt to walk. For months I continued to go 
flat-footed. I could not sustain my weight with heels lifted 
from the floor. In going down stairs I had to place my 
insteps on the edge of each step, or go one step at a time, 
like a child. Believing that the detectives were pampering 
me into prime condition, as a butcher fattens a beast 
for slaughter, I deliberately made myself out much weaker 
than I really was; and not a little of my inactivity was due 
to a desire to prolong my fairly comfortable existence, by 
deferring as long as possible the day of trial and conspicuous 
disgrace. 

But my mode of living was not without its distressing 
incidents. Whenever the attendants were wanted at the 
office, an electric bell was rung. During the fourteen months 
that I remained in this hospital in a depressed condition, 
the bell in my ward rang several hundred times. Never 
did it fail to send through me a mild shock of terror, for I 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 67 

imagined that at last the hour had struck for my transporta- 
tion to the scene of trial. Relatives and friends would be 
brought to the ward — heralded, of course, by a warning 
bell — and short interviews would be held in my room, dur- 
ing which the visitors had to do all the talking. My eldest 
brother, whom I shall refer to hereafter as my conservator, 
called often. He seldom failed to use one phrase which 
annoyed and disturbed me. 

"You are looking better and getting stronger," he would 
say. "We shall straighten you out yet." 

To be "straightened out," was a phrase which had a cer- 
tain sinister ambiguity. It might refer to the end of the 
hangman's rope, or to a fatal electric shock. It would of 
course be difhcult to avoid all ambiguity of speech in talking 
to one afflicted with delusions of persecution, but such care 
as can be exercised would contribute to the patient's peace 
of mind. 

I preferred to be let alone and the assistant physician in 
charge of my case, after several ineffectual attempts to en- 
gage me in conversation, humored my persistent taciturnity. 
For over a year nothing passed between us further than an 
occasional conventional salutation. Subsequent events have 
led me to doubt the wisdom of this policy, and to infer that 
had my timid confidence once been gained some of my delu- 
sions might have been imdermined, if not talked to death. 
As I finally seduced my Unreason into at least a semblance 
of sanity, by supplying myself with desired proofs as to the 
genuineness of relatives and friends, is it not reasonable to 
suppose that similar proofs, cleverly offered by others, might 
have produced the same result earlier? Among psychi- 
atrists I find the opinion that it is only at an advanced stage 
of recuperation that such an expedient would have any 
chance of success; and that even in the event of success, the 



68 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

time so saved would scarcely be worth considering. Never- 
theless, instead of assuming that delusions must correct 
themselves — if they are ever to be corrected — physicians 
(more scrupulously, I think, than they do) might give the 
patient the benefit of every doubt, and exercise their skill 
from time to time to ascertain, if nothing more, whether or 
not he exhibits signs of returning sanity. Of course, I will 
not presume to combat the question pathologically. I am 
only submitting for the consideration of psychiatrists an 
impression gained from the inside. 

For one year no further attention was paid to me than to 
see that I had three meals a day, the requisite number of 
baths, and a sufficient amount of exercise. I was, however, 
occasionally urged by an attendant to write a letter to some 
relative, but that, of course, I refused to do. As I shall have 
many hard things to say about attendants in general, I take 
pleasure in testifying that, so long as I remained in a pas- 
sive condition, those at this institution were kind, and at 
times even thoughtful. But so soon as I regained, in a large 
measure, my reason, and began to talk, diplomatic relations 
with doctors and attendants became so strained that war 
promptly ensued. 

It was no doubt upon the gradual but sure improvement 
in my physical condition that the doctors were relying for 
my eventual salvation. They were not without some war- 
rant for this. In a way I had become less suspicious, but 
my increased confidence was due as much to an increasing 
indifference to my fate as to an improvement in health. 
And there were other signs of improved mental vigor. I 
was still watchful, however, for a chance to end my life, 
and had I not largely regained my reason as soon as I did, 
I do not doubt that my choice of evils would have found tragic 
expression in an overt act. 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 69 

Having convinced myself that most of my associates were 
really insane, and therefore (as I believed) disqualified as 
competent witnesses in a court of law, I would occasionally 
engage in conversation with a few whose evident incompe- 
tency seemed to make them safe confidants. One, a man 
who during his life had suffered several nervous break- 
downs, more like acute nervous prostration than insanity, 
took a very evident interest in me and persisted in talking to 
me, often much against my will. His persistent inquisitive- 
ness seemed to support his own statement that he had for- 
merly been a successful life-insurance solicitor. He finally 
gained my confidence to such a degree that months before I 
finally began to talk to others I permitted myself to con- 
verse frequently with him — but only when we were so 
situated as to escape observation. I would talk to him on 
almost any subject except myself. At length, however, his 
admirable persistence overcame my reticence. During a 
conversation held in June, 1902, he abruptly said, "Why 
you are kept here I cannot understand. Apparently you 
are as sane as any one. You have never made any but 
sensible remarks to me." Now for weeks I had been waiting 
for a chance to tell this man my very thoughts. I had come 
to believe him a true friend who would not betray me. 

"If I should tell you some things which you apparently 
don't know, you would understand why I am held here," 
said I. 

"Well, tell me," he urged. 

"Will you promise not to repeat my statements to any one 
else?" 

"I promise not to say a word." 

"Well," said I, "you have seen certain persons who have 
come here, claiming to be relatives of mine." 

"Yes, and they are your relatives, aren't they?" 



70 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

"They look like my relatives, but they're not," was 
my reply. 

My inquisitive friend laughed aloud. "Well," said he, 
"if you mean that, I shall have to take back what I just 
said. You are really the craziest person I have ever met, 
and I have met several." 

"You will think differently some day," said I; for I be- 
lieved that when my trial should occur he would appreciate 
the significance of my statement. I did not tell him that I 
believed these callers to be detectives; nor did I hint that I 
thought myself in the hands of the police. 

Meanwhile, during July and August, 1902, I redoubled 
my activity in devising suicidal schemes; for I now thought 
my physical condition satisfactory to my enemies, and was 
sure that my trial could not be postponed beyond the next 
opening of the courts in September. I even went so far as to 
talk to one of the attendants, a medical student, who, during 
the summer, worked as an attendant at the hospital. I 
approached him artfully. First I asked him to procure 
from the library for me "The Scarlet Letter," "The House of 
Seven Gables," and other such books; then I talked med- 
icine and finally asked him to lend me a text-book on anat- 
omy which I knew he had in his possession. This he did, 
cautioning me not to let any one know that he had done so. 
The book once secured, I lost no time in examining that 
part which described the heart, its functions, and especially 
its exact location in the body. I had scarcely begun to read 
when the attendant returned and took the book from 
me, offering as his reason that, as an attendant, he had no 
right to give me a medical work. I have often wondered 
since whether this was an intervention of Providence. 

As is usual in institutions for the insane, all knives, forks, 
and other articles, which might be used by a patient for 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 71 

an insane purpose, were counted by the attendants after 
each meal. This I knew, and it had a deterrent effect. I 
dared not take one. Though I might at any time during 
the night have hanged myself, that method did not appeal 
to me, and I kept it in mind only as a last resort. To get 
possession of some sharp dagger-like instrument which I 
could plunge into my heart at a moment's notice — this was 
my consuming desire. With such a weapon I felt that I 
could, when the crisis came, rob the detectives of their vic- 
tory. During the summer months an employee spent his 
entire time driving a large lawn-mower over the grounds. 
This when not in use was often left outdoors. Upon it was 
a square wooden box, containing certain necessary tools, 
among them a sharp, spike-like instrument, used to clean the 
oil-holes when they had become clogged. This bit of steel 
was five or six inches long, and was shaped like a pencil. 
For at least three months prior to the moment of my restored 
reason I seldom went out of doors that I did not go with the 
intention of purloining that steel spike. I intended then to 
keep it in my room against the day of my anticipated trans- 
fer to jail. 

It was now that my delusions protected me from the very 
fate they had induced me to court. For had I not believed 
that the eye of a detective was on me every moment, I could 
have taken that spike a score of times. Often when it was 
not in use I walked to the lawn-mower and even laid my 
hand upon the tool-box. But I dared not open it. My 
feelings were much like those of Pandora about a certain 
other box. In my case, however, the box upon which I 
looked with longing had Hope without, and not within. 
Instinctively, perhaps, I realized this, for I did not lift 
the lid. 

One day, as the patients were returning to their wards, I 



72 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

saw, lying directly in my path (I could even now point out 
the spot), the coveted weapon. Never have I seen anything 
that I more desired. To have stooped and picked it up 
without detection would have been easy; and had I known, 
as I know now, that it had been carelessly dropped, nothing 
could have prevented me from doing so and perhaps using 
it with fatal effect. But I believed it had been placed there 
deliberately and as a test, by those who had divined my 
suicidal purpose. The eye of the imagined detective, which, 
I am inclined to believe, and like to believe, was the eye of 
the real God, was upon me; and though I stepped directly 
over it I did not pick up that thing of death. 



(^ 



XI 

When I had decided that my chance for securing the little 
stiletto-spike was very uncertain, I a^ once busied myself 
with plans which were designed to bring about my death 
by drowning. There was in the ward a large bath-tub. Ac- 
cess to it could be had at any time, except between the hour 
of nine at night (when the patients were locked in their 
rooms) and the following morning. How to make it acces- 
sible in those dark hours was the problem which confronted 
me. The attendant in charge was supposed to see that 
each patient was in his room when the door was locked. As 
it rarely happened that the patients were not in their rooms at 
the appointed time, the attendants naturally grew careless, and 
often locked a door without looking in. The "good night" 
of the attendant, a salutation usually devoid of sentiment, 
might, or might not, elicit a response, and the absence of a 
response would not tend to arouse suspicion — especially 
in a case like mine, for I would sometimes say "good night," 
but more often not. 

My simple and easy plan was to hide behind a piece of 
furniture in the corridor and there remain until the attend- 
ant had locked the doors of the rooms and retired. I 
had even advanced so far in my plan as to select a con- 
venient place. This was a nook within twenty feet of my 
own room. Should the attendant, when about to lock the 
door, discover my absence, I should, of course, immediately 
reveal my hiding-place by leaving it; and it would have been 
an easy matter to convince him that I had done the thing as a 

73 



74 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

test of his own vigilance. On the other hand, if I escaped 
discovery. I should then have nine hours at my disposal 
with little fear of interruption. True, the night-watch passed 
through the ward once every hour. But death by drown- 
ing requires a time no longer than that necessary to boil an 
egg. I had even calculated how long it would take to fill 
the tub with water. To make sure of a fatal result, I had 
secreted a piece of wire which I intended so to use that my 
head, once imder water, could by no possibility be raised 
above the surface in the inevitable struggle. 

I have said that I did not desire death; nor did I. Had 
the supposed detectives been able to convince me that they 
would keep their word, I would willingly have signed an 
agreement stipulating on my side that I must live the rest 
of my life as an inmate of an asylum, and on theirs that I 
should never undergo a trial for crime. 

Fortunately during these dismal preparations I had not 
lost interest in other schemes which probably saved my life. 
In these the fellow-patient who had won my confidence 
played the role of my ov^^n private detective. That he and 
I could defeat the combined forces of the Nation hardly 
seemed probable, but the seeming impossibihty of so doing 
only lent zest to the undertaking. My friend, who, of course, 
did not reahze that he was engaged in combat with the Secret 
Service, was allowed to go where he pleased within the limits 
of the city where the hospital was situated. Accordingly 
I determined to enlist his services. It was during July 
that, at my suggestion, he tried to procure copies of certain 
New Haven newspapers, of the date of my attempted suicide 
and the several dates immediately following. My purpose 
was to learn what motive had been ascribed to my suicidal 
attempt. I felt sure that they would contain at least hints 
as to the nature of the criminal charges against me. But this 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 75 

purpose I did not disclose to my friend. In due time he re- 
ported that no copies for the given dates were to be had. 
So that quest proved fruitless, and I attributed the failure to 
the superior strategy of the enemy. 

Meanwhile, my friend had not desisted from his attempt 
to convince me that my apparent relatives were not spurious ; 
and one day I said to him: "If my relatives still live in New 
Haven, their addresses must be in the latest New Haven 
Directory. Here is a hst containing the names and former 
addresses of my father, brother, and uncle. These were 
their addresses in 1900. To-morrow, when you go out, 
please see whether they appear in the New Haven Directory 
for 1902, These persons who present themselves to me as 
relatives pretend to live at these addresses. If they speak 
the truth, the 1902 Directory will corroborate them. I will 
then have hope that a letter sent to any one of these ad- 
dresses will reach relatives, — and surely some attention 
will be paid to it." 

The next day, which was August 27th, my own good detec- 
tive went to a local pubHshing house where directories of 
the several important cities throughout the country may be 
consulted. Shortly after he went out upon this errand, my 
conservator appeared. He found me walking about the lawn. 
At his suggestion we sat down. Bold in the assurance that 
I could kill myself before the crisis came, I talked with him 
freely, replying to many of his questions and asking several. 
My conservator, who had never fully understood that I de- 
nied his identity, commented with manifest pleasure on my 
new-found readiness to talk. He would have been less 
pleased, however, had he been able to read my mind. 

Shortly after my conservator's departure my fellow-patient 
returned and informed me that the latest New Haven direc- 
tory contained the names and addresses I had given him. 



76 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

This information, though it did not prove that my morn- 
ing caller was no detective, did convince me that my real 
brother still lived where he did when I left New Haven, 
two years earlier. At this time my physical senses were less 
perverted than they had been previously, and in that fact 
lay my salvation. Now that my senses no longer lied to me, 
my returning reason enabled me to construct the ingenious 
scheme which, I believe, saved my life ; for, had I not largely 
regained my reason when I did, I am incHned to believe that 
my distraught mind would have destroyed itself and me, be- 
fore it could have been restored by the slow process of re- 
turning health. 

A few hours after my private detective had given me the 
information I so much desired, I wrote my first letter in 
twenty-six months. As letters go it is in a class by 
itself. I dared not ask for ink, so I wrote with a lead pencil. 
Another fellow-patient in whom I had confidence, at my 
request, addressed the envelope; but he was not in the secret 
of its contents. This was an added precaution, for I thought 
the Secret Service men might have found out that I had a 
detective of my own and would confiscate any letters ad- 
dressed by him or me. The next morning, my "detective" 
mailed the letter. That letter I still have, and I treasure 
it as any innocent man condemned to death would treasure 
a pardon or reprieve. It should convince the reader that 
sometimes an insane man can think and write clearly. An 
exact copy of this — the most important letter I ever expect 
to be called upon to write — is here appended : 

T-. ^ August 29, 1902. 

Dear George: 

On last Wednesday morning a person who claimed to be George M. Beers 
of New Haven, Ct., clerk in the Director's Office of the Shefl&eld Scientific 
School and a brother of mine, called to see me. 

Perhaps what he said was true, but after the events of the last two years 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 77 

I find myself inclined to doubt the truth of everything that is told me. He 
said that he would come and see me again sometime next week, and I am 
sending you this letter in order that you may bring it with you as a passport, 
provided you are the one who was here on Wednesday. 

If you did not call as stated please say nothing about this letter to any- 
one, and when your double arrives, I'll tell him what I think of him. Would 
send other messages, but while things seem as they do at present it is im- 
possible. Have had some one else address envelope for fear letter might be 

held up on the way. ,^ 

^ Yours, 

Clifford W. B. 

Though I felt reasonably confident that this message 
would reach my brother, I was by no means certain. I was 
sure, however, that, should he receive it, under no circum- 
stances would he turn it over to any one hostile to myself. 
When I wrote the words: "Dear George," my feeling was 
much like that of a child who sends a letter to Santa Claus 
after his faith in the existence of Santa Claus has been shaken. 
Like the sceptical child, I felt there was nothing to lose, but 
everything to gain. "Yours" fully expressed such affection 
for relatives as I was then capable of, — for the belief that 
I had disgraced, perhaps destroyed, my family prompted 
me to forbear to use the family name in the signature. 

The thought that I might soon get in touch with my old 
world did not excite me. I had not much faith any- 
way that I was to re-establish former relations, and what 
little faith I had was almost dissipated on the morning of 
August 30th, 1902, when a short message, written on a 
slip of paper, reached me by the hand of an attendant. 
It informed me that my brother would call that afternoon. 
I thought it a lie. I felt that any brother of mine would 
have taken the pains to send a letter in reply to the first I 
had written him in over two years. The thought that there 
had not been time for him to do so and that this message 
must have arrived by telephone did not then occur to me. 



78 A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 

What I believed was that my own letter had been confis- 
cated. I asked one of the doctors to swear on his honor 
that it really was my own brother who was coming to see 
me. He did so swear, and this may have diminished my 
first doubt somewhat, but not much, for abnormal suspicion 
robbed all men in my sight of whatever honor they may 
have had. 

The thirtieth of the month was what might he called a 
perfect June day in August. In the afternoon, as usual, the 
patients were taken out of doors, I among them. I wan- 
dered about the lawn, and cast frequent and expectant 
glances toward the gate, through which I believed my antici- 
pated visitor would soon pass. In less than an hour he 
appeared. I first caught sight of him about three hundred 
feet away, and, impelled more by curiosity than hope, I 
advanced to meet him. "I wonder what the lie will be this 
time," was the gist of my thoughts. 

The person approaching me was indeed the counterpart of 
my brother as I remembered him. Yet he was no more my 
brother than he had been at any time during the preceding 
two years. He was still a detective. Such he was when I 
shook his hand. As soon as that ceremony was over he 
drew forth a leather pocket-book. I instantly recognized 
it as one I myself had carried for several years prior to 
the time I was taken ill in 1900. It was from this that he 
took my recent letter. 

"Here's my passport," said he. 

"It's a good thing you brought it," said I coolly, as I 
glanced at it and again shook his hand — this time the hand 
of my own brother. 

"Don't you want to read it?" he asked. 

"There is no need of that," was my reply. "I am con- 
vinced." 



A MIND THAT FOUND ITSELF 79 

After my long journey of exploration in the jungle of a 
tangled imagination, a journey which finally ended in my 
finding the person for whom I had long searched, my be- 
havior differed very Httle from that of a great explorer who, 
after a perilous trip through real jungles, found the man he 
sought and, coolly, grasping his hand, greeted him with a 
now historic remark. 

This was the culminating moment of my gradual re-ad- 
justment. The molecules of my mental magnet had at last 
turned in the direction of right thinking. In a word, 
my mind had found itself. That this apparently instanta- 
neous return to reason was for me an epoch-making event, 
no one will deny. I may be pardoned, then, if I dwell 
upon it at length. The dividing line between sanity and in- 
sanity has ever been a topic for discussion. In my own case 
I believe that I can safely statejhatjdi^e elapse^ time between 
a condition of absolute insanity and comparative sanity was 
scarcely appreciable. This statement squares with the 
psychological fact that it takes about one tenth of a 
second for the mind to form a perception. The very instant 
I caught sight of my letter in the hands of my brother, all 
was changed. The thousands of false impressions recorded 
during the seven hundred and ninety-eight days of my de- 
pressed state seemed at once to correct themselves. Un- 
truth became Truth. My old world was again mine. •, 
That gigantic web woven by an indefatigable yet tired 
imagination, I immediately recognized as a snare of delu- C 
sions, in which I had all but hopelessly entangled myself. \ 
That the Gordian loiot of mental torture should be cut 
and swept away by the mere glance of a willing eye is 
like a miracle; but not a few insane persons recover their 
reason — or, more scientifically expressed, reach the culmi- 
nation of their hitherto invisible process of re-adjustment — 


